If you don’t know you have it…
then you don’t. (Not yet.)

Cleaning out the fridge after a power failure, I found three half-empty containers of anchovies. Because they magically migrate to the back of the fridge, every time I had needed some, I ended up opening a new jar, because the old ones were invisible. Not just invisible if I had looked for them, but so invisible that it never even occurred to me to look for them.

And this is even more likely to happen with the data on your hard drive. If you don’t know to look for it, if you don’t believe it’s there, it might as well be deleted.

And of course, this applies to our lost skills, confidence and experience as well.

It’s worth putting in regular effort to remind ourselves of what we’ve already got and how it has served us in the past.

DECEMBER 28, 2020

Stand up and fight
One of Woody Guthrie’s resolutions was to “Wake up and fight.”

But he wasn’t talking about being a bully. Or picking a fight at the local bar.

He was talking about changing the culture.

He was challenging himself to push back against the doubters, and even more than that, to overcome his own self-doubt.

The culture is created by all of us. It might feel as though it’s done to us, but it’s also created by us.

Wake up, stand up and fight. Make things better.

DECEMBER 27, 2020

Amplify possibility
“People like us do things like this.”

Social media understands this.

It also knows that people like points, likes and something that feels like popularity.

The social media companies optimized their algorithms for profit. And profit, they figured, would come from engagement. And engagement, they figured, would come from confounding our instincts and rewarding outrage.

Because outrage draws a crowd.

And crowds establish culture.

And a desire to be the leader of a crowd reinforced the cycle.

And so the social networks created a game, a game in which you ‘win’ by being notorious, outrageous or, as they coined the phrase, “authentic.” The whole world is watching, if you’re willing to put on a show.

That’s not how the world actually works. The successful people in your community or your industry (please substitute ‘happy’ for successful in that sentence) don’t act the way the influencers on Twitter, YouTube or Facebook do. That’s all invented, amplified stagecraft, it’s not the actual human condition.

Many of us have an overwhelming need to rubberneck, to slow down when we pass a crash on the highway. This is odd, as most people don’t go out of their way to visit the morgue, just for kicks. And yet…

I hope we’d agree that if people started staging car crashes on the side of the road to get attention, we’d be outraged.

That’s what happening, and the leaders of social networks pretend that they can’t do a thing about it, just as Google pretends that they can’t control the results of their search algorithm.

The shift that the leaders of the social networks need to make is simple. In the long run, it will cost them nothing. And within weeks, it will create a world that’s calmer, happier and more productive.

Amplify possibility. Dial down the spread of disinformation, trolling and division. Make it almost impossible to get famous at the expense of civilization. Embrace the fact that breaking news doesn’t have to be the rhythm of our days. Reward thoughtfulness and consistency and responsibility.

You can do this. Enough already.

DECEMBER 26, 2020

The two levers of modernity
First: If you come up with an innovation that creates value, that value is multiplied a million-fold because now you can share it outside your village.

Second: If you build a community, the network effect creates increasing amounts of value as more people use it.

And the pothole: As we race to create value, it’s easy to forget that it’s unevenly distributed. A safety net isn’t perfect, but it’s better than no net at all.

Rising tides lift all boats, but we’re not boats.


Reasons people donate
It’s urgent
It’s certain to work

It’s close by

Everyone else is

It might happen to you

Only someone as caring as you will choose to make a difference

Only someone as smart as you can understand something this complicated

It will raise your status with your cohort

Others are suffering

Time’s almost up

People like us do things like this

It’s the right thing to do

You are suffering

It’s a longshot worth pursuing

To create justice

It comes with a tote bag

It’s an obligation

Your parents taught you well

We’ll be proud of you

Because right here and right now, nothing would feel better than making a donation…

[more]

DECEMBER 25, 2020

Fortunately
In the midst of all of it, some people are still able to trust. To trust in others, to trust in possibility and to trust themselves. And…
we’re surrounded by opportunity.

we often get a second chance.

there are still problems to be solved.

we learned something.

there’s another advance, right around the corner.

And always, there’s a chance to make things better.

DECEMBER 24, 2020

The seeds we plant
2020 was a terrible year for too many people. So much trauma, dislocation and illness. Everyone has their own stories, and everyone suffered (unevenly and unfairly) from the extraordinary shifts in our lives.

And yet, seeds were planted. Five or ten or twenty years from now, people will remember projects that were started, connections that were established, realizations that occurred. Doors were opened, babies were born and changes were made.

Few people celebrate forest fires, but we’re all eager to walk through the sylvan glades that follow.

If you were kept from planting all the seeds you hoped to in 2020, that’s okay. Because the best time to plant more seeds is always right now. Or perhaps tomorrow.

I’ve benefited from countless lucky breaks through the years of this career, and many of them are the result of the people I’ve been fortunate enough to work with, listen to and teach.

To help create an institution of scale and impact, Akimbo the platform for learning that I’ve been talking about on this blog for years is now an independent B corp. In 2020, the leadership and coaches at Akimbo have shown up in ways that no one could have expected, and the tens of thousands of alumni are grateful for all of it.

Thank you to each of them, and to you. For caring and for leading.



Did it do what it was supposed to do?
That’s not often the same as, “I did my best.”
Quality has a very specific definition: Did it meet the customer’s requirements?

Any experience, product or deliverable that meets that spec is deemed to have met the quality standard. If it doesn’t, it’s not of quality.

And so we need to begin with, “who’s it for?” because the customer might not be who we think it is.

“Was it a good wedding?” might mean, “did the host feel fully seen, empowered and celebrated?” or it might mean, “did you have fun?” or it might mean twenty other things.

The second question goes along with that, which is, “what’s it for?” This product or experience, what did the customer hire it to do? Again, being clear about this is the only way to improve what we’re doing.

Only after we answer these two questions can we dig into how to be more clear about what we’re offering and to whom, along with how we can make our work more effective and efficient.

[And then it gets complicated…]

What if there’s more than one “who”? What if instead of trying to please one customer, you have a variety of customers? Or if there are internal constituents, or non-paying entities who have a say in it?

What if you try to do it again? Which elements could be improved? Become more efficient? Have less impact on the workforce or the environment? Become more reliable?

And what if the organization is more than just a few people? Where do processes, supply chain management and systems come into play?

But we still have to begin at the beginning. Who’s it for and what’s it for?

DECEMBER 23, 2020

Guests, hosts and landlords
The landlord acts like he owns the place, because he does. The landlord makes the rules and has the power to enforce them.
The host acts on behalf of those that are being served. “Gracious” is the goal.

And guests realize that they’re in a fortunate position and try not to abuse it.

As Dave Winer has pointed out, the web has no owner. We’re all guests, except when we have a chance to be a host. Acting like a landlord is counter to what makes the whole thing work.

The same might be true for the places you hang out as well.

DECEMBER 22, 2020

Hiding ideas
Some people hesitate to share an idea because they’re worried it will be stolen.

In general, these people are afraid of success, not failure. An idea unspoken is a safe one, which not only can’t be stolen, but it can’t be tested, criticized, improved or used in the real world.

DECEMBER 21, 2020

Beyond a shadow
How certain do you need to be?

When presented with a new opportunity, or a risk to be avoided, do you have any doubts?

Because there are always doubts. And then we multiply it, waiting for the doubt to go away, for it to not only be a shadow of what it was, but beyond that…

The desire to avoid change is rarely held to the same standards as progress. By the time the shadow is gone, it might be too late.

DECEMBER 20, 2020

“The way we’ve always done it”
There’s a lot to be said for tradition, for stability and for the foundation that the status quo gives us to move forward.
But, if we were on the spot to analyze our day, our processes and our assumptions, how many things do we do simply because we are in the habit?

It’s impossible to try every option, to explore every alternative and examine how every culture or competitor does things, but…

If we don’t even know we’re doing things by rote, when will we be restless enough to try to make them better?

DECEMBER 19, 2020

Blunders and mistakes
In chess, a blunder is a mistake that no one can excuse. Even one blunder and you’re probably going to lose.
In our vigilance to avoid blunders, sometimes we try to eliminate mistakes as well.

For understandable reasons, we spend a lot of time trying to avoid blunders and minimizing mistakes. But if that’s all we do, we’ve given up the chance to do something magical.

If you’re working on the frontier, if you’re leading, creating or inventing, you’ve signed up for mistakes. That’s the price of innovation.

After the fact, it’s easy for an attempt at great work to look like nothing but a blunder. But it might simply be a mistake that we can learn from.

DECEMBER 18, 2020

What’s your game?
Someone who plays Monopoly every week, and always uses the little silver hat as their playing piece and always buys Boardwalk if he can–he may think that this is his game.
That’s way too literal.

Someone who trades pork bellies on the floor of the commodities exchange might believe that she has a particular affinity to pork bellies, and that the specific is the game.

Still too literal.

In the first case, the ‘game’ isn’t the silver hat, the properties or even the Monopoly set. The game is the way it feels to engage with the regular group and the thrill of trading and perhaps winning. It would be possible to replicate or even surpass this game by playing Othello instead, or scouring garage sales to sell hidden treasures on eBay…

In the second case, the ‘game’ might actually be the thrill of the trade. Or it might be the satisfaction the trader gets from having an easily measured indicator (wealth) go up. Or it might be the status that comes from being richer than the folks you went to high school with…

We invent all sorts of trappings and decide that the trappings are our work. They’re not. There are only a handful of games that most people decide to play… games that have boundaries, other players, connections and outcomes. You can switch from one set of trappings to another much more easily than you imagine, particularly if you focus on the basic building blocks of your game instead of the outward appearance.

If someone takes away your playing piece, don’t fall into the trap of deciding you can’t play a game any longer.

If someone tries to persuade you that the game is to make as much money as possible, realize that they need more insight and imagination.

Whenever you can, it might pay to seek to create a game that works for you and for those you seek to serve. Because those games are the sustainable ones and the ones that you can play for a long time to come.

DECEMBER 17, 2020

New decisions
“I was wrong,” isn’t something you hear very often. Particularly from people in power, or folks who have gone out on a limb espousing a belief.

It’s far easier to persuade someone to make a new decision based on new information.

That way, they can be right now, and they can also believe that they were right before.

DECEMBER 16, 2020

The problem with a mic drop
It’s fun to say the perfect thing at the perfect time. Mic drop.
The problem is that then you have to bend over and pick up the microphone.

Conversations take more effort but tend to be worth it.

DECEMBER 15, 2020

A place to write
One reason that successful and prolific singer-songwriters are prolific is that as soon as they’ve written a song, they can record it and publish it.
And a huge advantage of having a daily blog is that the software is always open, waiting for you to write something.

Your story doesn’t have to be a book, it is simply your chance to make a difference. “Here’s what I see, here’s how you can be part of it.”

When we remove the pre (finding the pen, the paper, the notebook, the software) and the post (finding a way to publish it), it turns out that we write more often, and writing more often leads to writing better.

It doesn’t have to be perfect, it can simply be the next thing you do.

The patterns matter. Streaks work.

All part of your practice.

DECEMBER 14, 2020

Seeing differently
Here are some books for the end of the year… fifty years of ideas that have helped me understand the world differently:

Gödel, Escher, Bach — Before meta was cool, Douglas Hofstadter won a Pulitzer Prize for this intricately created examination of math, art and music.

Caste — My book of the year. Wilkerson helps us see how persistent and hidden the indoctrination of race and status lie in our culture.

Understanding Comics — Another meta book, and a masterpiece of explanation and insight.

The Red Queen — There are a ton of very cool books on evolutionary theory and this one is particularly good.

Knocking on Heaven’s Door — Lisa Randall’s explanation of physics will change the way you look at the world.

Guns, Germs and Steel — Another classic, it has earned its spot in the canon. An explanation (not without controversy) of how the world ended up as it did. This is what the study of geography is actually about.

The Beginning of Infinity — After you read Randall, this book will take those ideas and expand them. A lot.

Impro — This book transformed the way I saw human interaction, and had a significant impact in the creation of This is Marketing.

What Technology Wants — Kevin Kelly has changed my mind over and over again, and this one is the one I think about the most often.

The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas — A short story from Ursula LeGuin that you will never forget.

Debt — An astonishing look at 5,000 years of human history by the late David Graeber.

The Jazz of Physics — A great book, even (especially) for people who think they don’t like either.

When Things Fall Apart — Each of Pema’s books is special, and the audio books in particular. This is a fine place to start.

Books are an extraordinary device, transitioning through time and space, moving from person to person and leaving behind insight and connection. I’m grateful every single day for the privilege of being able to read (and to write).

And writing doesn’t always have to take the form of books. Check out this prize-winning video:


DECEMBER 13, 2020

The paradox of discernment
The typical ten-year-old violinist can’t tell the difference between a cheap instrument and a Guarneri.
A harried traveler simply wolfs down a hamburger, not really worried or aware of its provenance or flavor.

And a bureaucrat buys whatever is cheapest and meets spec, without regard for how well it is designed or the supply chain that created it.

Enthusiasts will work their whole lives to be able to tell the difference in how an orchestra sounds, or how the chocolate is tempered or the simple elegance of thoughtful engineering.

And then, once we do, the incompetent or mediocre stuff isn’t worth much.

In order to appreciate the truly great work, we often end up becoming disappointed with the rest.

DECEMBER 12, 2020

Whining
Toddlers whine. Most adults figure out how to lose the habit, because it’s toxic. And yet it persists.

Whining is a seductive package deal. When it works, it gets us attention, it lowers expectations, it gains sympathy and it forces people to identify with our pain. And it helps people feel as though they’re not responsible.

Often, the amount of whining is totally unrelated to the level of discomfort, and it seems to increase with how much privilege people perceive they deserve.

So why avoid it?

Because it changes our outlook on the world. When whining becomes a habit, we need to continue it, so we begin to interpret events as opportunities to prove that our whining is justified.

And because over time, people hate being around a whiner. The selfish desires of the habitual whiner eventually become clear. We realize that our shared reality is the world as it is, and that the whiner isn’t actually being singled out. And through practice, we learn that the best way to make things better is to work to improve them, not to demand special treatment. Reminding myself of the perils of whining is helpful indeed.

Optimists run the risk of being disappointed now and then. Whiners are always disappointing.

DECEMBER 11, 2020

Jot
An almost magical idea, a tiny little word, a chance to make it real.

If someone tasks you with carving something profound into a block of granite, the emotional overhead is probably too high to do our best work.

But if you simply want to jot something down, all you need is an iota, a tiny glimpse of what might work.

It turns out that just about all granite-worthy ideas begin as jots.

Simply jot.

DECEMBER 10, 2020

Welcome and problems
“You’re welcome,” is not the same as, “it’s my pleasure.”

and

“No problem,” is not the same as, “I’m happy to help.”

These sentences are the closing parentheses of a simple conversation that opens with “thank you.”

We have to say something. The “thank you” demands acknowledgement.

It could be, “okay, now we’re even.”

Or we could express satisfaction at having the ability to make a contribution. We can continue the infinite game instead of simply walking away.

That might be more satisfying all around. A wave is more powerful than a grimace.

DECEMBER 9, 2020

Predicting the future
Humans do it all the time. Sometimes with great success. Not just easy-to-measure and profitable endeavors like sports betting or the stock market, but essential human interactions like, “what’s the best way to welcome a kindergarten student on the first day of school,” or “If we arrange the intersection this way, traffic will flow better.” In matters of public health and engineering, the ability to have a good idea about the repercussions of our work is urgent.

When dealing with a prognosticator, it’s worth asking three questions:

“What’s your track record?” It’s unlikely we’ll be right every single time, but once we adjust for luck and statistical anomalies, do you regularly outperform the others, or are you simply loud about it?

“Can you show your work?” It’s hard to trust someone who has a secret method. While this might be a competitive requirement, it’s more likely that the person has simply had a lucky streak (streaks are statistically likely).

“Have you taught your method to others?” This is a variation of the previous question. If people are using the method to successfully predict the future in other areas, then we’re seeing a resilient and robust approach to understanding how the world works.

Rules of thumb (the topic of my very first book, co-authored 34 years ago) are a stand in for the sort of rigor that is far more common today. With our predictions etched into the memory of the internet and more data available than ever before, we ought to be better at predicting what’s going to happen next and determining who’s good at that and who isn’t. But belief is a strong force, widely held, and sometimes it takes us a while to realize that confidence and volume are not a replacement for seeing things as they are and understanding how they work.

DECEMBER 8, 2020

On getting a fancy MBA…
If I was admitted to a prestigious business school and scheduled to begin in January or even September, I’m pretty sure I’d defer.
Take a gap year, take two.

For many students, the two most important parts of the top-tier MBA are getting in and getting out. It’s about selection and certification.

For the last seventy years, the most famous graduate schools in business have been honing a particular model of teaching and value creation. They excel at a sometimes-magical sort of classroom experience, one that uses exclusivity and status and real-time high-stakes interaction to create an esprit de corps as well as occasional moments of real growth. And when the programs work, the $350,000 in tuition and opportunity cost for two years can be repaid with a fancy job that brings leverage and impact to the certified graduate.

The scarce degree is a signaling mechanism for a certain group of consultants and investment banks eager to hire people who have been filtered out and paid their dues as a way of showing commitment to a specific career.

It’s predicted that more people will apply this year than ever before. In uncertain times, the process feels reassuring. For most students, the elite MBA is about the prize at the end, not the learning or the experience.

Due to the pandemic, many of those in-person interactions moved online. And if the schools are honest about it, the interactions they offered online aren’t very good. Instead of the result of nearly a century of improvement, they’re often slapped together, and they’re filled with compromise. The people who built them weren’t charged with improving what was on offer on campus, they were supposed to come up with something that would either augment it or be a less-expensive and less-prestigious alternative for people who couldn’t participate in the ‘real’ program.

My alma mater was proud to have shifted online in a matter of weeks, but they certainly realize that if it didn’t have the fancy name on it, it wouldn’t have been worth much.

After a semester or even a full year of this, it’s quite possible you won’t have really gotten to know your peers, nor will you have learned much more than you could have from a close reading of twenty books.

And for many, that’s okay, because they’re paying for the certificate, not the learning. I wrote about this twenty years ago…

When I taught at the NYU graduate school of business, I was amazed. Not by the caliber of students, which was very high, but at how little emotional enrollment and intellectual curiosity many of them had in learning what was on offer. A few realized how much they could learn, but many of the students were simply concerned with what was on the test.

When I started the altMBA five years ago, I probably chose the wrong name for it. Because I didn’t set out to replace the business school. Instead, the goal has always been to use a new medium in a new way, to create a thirty-day experience that does what it does better than it could be done any other way.

As a filtering/certifying/sorting mechanism, the elite MBA remains a profitable path for the few people who end up at McKinsey and similar institutions. But most of us don’t have those jobs and don’t want to do that work. Instead, we have the opportunity to level up and figure out how to find more relevance and impact in the work we choose to do. We don’t need a certificate–instead, it’s about learning to see and exploring how to make an impact.

The altMBA and its parent, Akimbo, are now independently owned and run, a B Corp. committed to doing work that matters. But the mission hasn’t changed–to use this new medium in a productive way to help people level up. If you’ve been wondering, “is this all there is to work,” it might be a good time to check out the altMBA. If you’re ready to lean into the process and the learning, without giving up your day job or focusing on scarcity, the altMBA could be a good fit.

No teachers, no gurus, no tests, no accreditation. Simply community in service of finding a better way forward.

The Early Decision admission deadline is tomorrow, Tuesday.

If you know someone in traditional education who is eager to push their medium forward, I hope you’ll point them to what they’re building at Akimbo. At 2% of the cost, it shouldn’t be better than what the famous schools are offering online, but I’m pretty certain that it is.

Education and learning are often very different. And online is not simply the same as sitting in a very big classroom but with a keyboard. It’s an entirely new form of pedagogy, one that’s about doing, not complying, about possibility, not coercion.

We have the chance to make things better. To learn and to lead. Together.

DECEMBER 7, 2020

Trading trust for attention
The old adage was always wrong. “Say whatever you like, but spell my name right.”

And now it’s even more of a trap.

The temptation to get the word out is overwhelming. There’s so much noise and so much hustle going on that we might believe that it’s okay to trade our standards and principles and position for some attention. At least for a minute or two.

The latest viral video is for an online dating site, and it features Satan as one of their customers. Nicely shot, sort of funny, with just the right amount of inside humor, there’s no arguing that it got attention.

But it burned trust. It established an image that contradicts the position they worked hard to earn for more than a decade.

There have always been shortcuts to attention. But the only purpose of advertising of any kind is to cause action, and action only happens when there’s trust involved.

DECEMBER 6, 2020

Treats
The only way to train a group of sea monkeys is by triggering an instinctual reaction.
The best way to train a dog is with tiny tasty treats, combined with calm and consistent feedback. Some dog owners resist this approach, because it doesn’t seem like the dog is really engaged or paying attention or learning anything if there’s too direct a connection between the actual treat and the action of the dog.

It’s tempting to resort to punishment instead, because it’s not only immediate, but for some trainers, it can relieve frustration and requires less patience. But punishment creates trauma.

Humans make up a lot of stories about what motivates us, but sooner or later, many of our stories involve feedback. We’re not sea monkeys, but we’re well aware of how the world around us treats us.

The most persistent changes in behavior happen when the story is so ingrained, we forget all about the feedback that reinforced it in the first place.

But it still started with the desire to be seen, to be treated with respect, to receive the dignity we each deserve. Ring a bell?

DECEMBER 5, 2020

Insulation from the user experience
When a small enterprise offers a lousy user experience, the person in charge learns about it, fast.

Customers leave, visitors bounce, complaints roll in. It’s expensive and it undermines the goals of the organization. Fortunately, in a small organization, the person with the ability to make change happen hears about it and can take action.

In a large organization, like my bank, the resources to make things better are dramatically bigger and largely underused.

That’s because the person who should take action has other priorities. Not only aren’t they exposed to the valuable feedback that frontline workers get (because the organization doesn’t reward ‘bad’ news), but they haven’t prioritized getting the user experience right.

It seems more important to please the boss, go to meetings and keep the numbers on track than it is to fix what might not feel broken.

Spend some time in the store.

Visit your own website to get work done the way a customer would.

Answer the tech phone calls for a few hours.

And figure out how to turn the user experience into a metric that’s as easy to measure as how much money you made last month.

DECEMBER 4, 2020

Generalizations work (until they don’t)
Unlike natural phenomena like orbiting planets or geologic formations, there are no consistent and perfect laws of human behavior.
If we’re talking about groups of people, if we’re teaching, leading or trying to predict future behavior (all three are related) then we’re making a generalization.

And perhaps we don’t realize it, or aren’t clear that we are.

“In general, in many settings, most kindergarten kids have trouble getting through a long day without a nap.”

That’s not quite the same as, “all kids need a nap.”

Useful generalizations are essential to productive interventions and generous leadership.

Without generalizations, it’s almost impossible to begin to serve people.

And there lies the trap. If we stick with them too long, or insist that they are absolute, or fail to seek out the exceptions that all generalizations have, then we end up excluding or ignoring people who need to be seen. Which betrays all the work we set out to do.

We begin with a market or an audience, but we ultimately serve the individual.

DECEMBER 3, 2020

Understanding the automatic self
How do you act when you’re not thinking about how you act? When no one is looking and when you’re just doing what you’re doing…
That’s the automatic self. No narrative, no second-guessing.

Now, here’s the real question:

Has your automatic self changed since you were a kid?

If it has (and I hope it has) then that’s all the proof we need that the automatic self isn’t a given, it’s not hard-wired and it’s not permanent.

In fact, it changes from practice. It’s a skill.

We can learn to be the ‘authentic’ version of ourselves that we’d like to live with.

It takes habits, learning and feedback. And the commitment to become a better version of ourselves.

DECEMBER 2, 2020

Shopping is not the same as buying
Just about everyone over the age of fifteen, anywhere in the world, engages in the market in some way. We need things and we buy them.

That’s not what shopping is.

Shopping is the act of imagining what you might want. It’s the thrilling but risky exchange of money for something that you’ve never purchased before. Something that might be better than you hope, but it might not.

In some communities, shopping is so foreign and risky that it simply doesn’t happen.

Shopping is a cultural activity, with styles and approaches varying depending on who you are and where you live.

Shopping releases chemicals in our brain. In many cases, particularly with luxury goods, it’s this emotional shift that we’re actually paying for, not the thing we’re buying.

The trillion-dollar industries that are based on shopping as a sport (as distinguished from buying what we need) are relatively new, but have been around long enough that many of us take them for granted–normal activities that appear to have always been around.

Money is a story. Your story is probably different from everyone else’s. Our relationship with debt, savings and earning money is extraordinarily complex. Consumer credit has turned from a convenience and useful bridge into, for many people, a trap.

Gift cards, garage sales and self-storage units start to reveal just how many layers we’ve built up around our commitment to shopping.

In small doses, for many people, shopping can produce happiness. But it doesn’t usually scale.

More stuff might not be the substitute for the things that we truly want.

DECEMBER 1, 2020

The monopoly distinction
At enlightened companies, leaders are smart enough to ask, “how do we make things better for our customers?” They realize that this simple ratchet leads to loyalty, word of mouth and more customers.

At monopolies or companies that seek to act like them, the question is, “how do we make things better for us?”

NOVEMBER 30, 2020

The persistence of hierarchy and status roles
REM was one of the most respected indy rock bands. You’d think that a group that somehow managed to thread the needle between whatever authentic means to them and huge popular success could walk away from traditional measures of who’s up and who’s not…

In a long-ago Rolling Stone article, lead singer Michael Stipe said that he had never heard a song from Mariah Carey and in fact had just learned how to say her name. There’s a difference between focusing on your lane and denigrating the others in your field.

In the same article, bandmate Michael Mills expresses disappointment that even though they recorded at Prince’s studio in Minneapolis, he never stopped by to say hello or even invite them to the party on Friday.

Turtles all the way down, turtles all the way up.

High school persists.

It’s possible to use the status hierarchy as a sort of fuel, a way to motivate yourself to push a little harder. But it is also possible, and far more resilient, to use connection and possibility as fuel as well.

The best lesson of high school might be that everyone has a noise in their heads, everyone feels uncomfortable and everyone would appreciate a little kindness and respect.

NOVEMBER 29, 2020

More popular (and cheap, too)
If Harper Lee had written To Kill a Mockingbird today, there’s no doubt that the salesforce and the marketers would have pushed for a catchier title, probably with better SEO.

And it’s hard to imagine that Waiting for Godot would have ever been performed on Broadway.

On a similar note: What would happen if instead of taking elements out of our work in order to make the product cheaper, we put things in instead? What if we made it better?

It’s tempting to race to the bottom. The problem is that you might win, and then you’ll have to stay there. Worse, you might try and come in second, accomplishing not much of anything.

Linkbait is a trap, because it brings you attention you actually don’t want.

The alternative is to be idiosyncratic, specific and worth the effort and expense. What would happen if you made something important, breathtaking or wonderful? The race to the top is not only more satisfying, it’s also more likely to work.

And then you get to live there. Doing work you’re proud of, without excuses.

NOVEMBER 28, 2020

Contradictory answers to obvious questions
That’s how you know that they’re not obvious.
When smart, committed people disagree about the answer to a question, you’ve found a question worth pursuing and a discussion worth having.

NOVEMBER 27, 2020

The grateful pumpkin
It might not be autumn where you live, but the iconography of the large orange pumpkin travels around the world.

People carve faces into them, stick a candle inside and use them to ward off the darkness.

Perhaps we could consider writing on one instead. Inscribing all the things we’re grateful for, all the people who show up in our lives. We could highlight our heroes, our friends, the selfless people who show up for the community instead of simply looking for a shortcut… We could even remind ourselves of the systems, situations and dynamics that we take for granted.

Seeing that pumpkin every day is a great way to remind myself of how extraordinarily lucky I am. Even when it seems as though the news is an unending litany of selfishness and tragedy, it’s possible to find someone who made a difference.

Thank you for caring, for showing up and especially, for leading.

NOVEMBER 26, 2020

Butterfly hunting
Ideas are like that.

The successful editor, curator or entrepreneur doesn’t go hunting ideas to kill them, but to celebrate them, identify them and dance with them.

And a brutal, all-out frontal attack won’t work. It’s not about raising a ton of money or insisting that the world supply you with only the good ideas. Quibi failed because of the hubris of believing that the ideas could be conjured on a schedule. And countless middlemen have struggled with the dead-end of only wanting to embrace the good ideas, which are often impossible to distinguish from the others at a distance.

Sometimes, you need to look more closely, to reconsider or to circle around again.

And sometimes we go butterfly hunting and find nothing at all.

Fred Hills, who published fifty New York Times bestsellers (including my first one) died a few weeks ago. He took the quest literally, and used to go butterfly hunting with Nabakov. His belief in my book was matched by the trust he offered me and so many authors to find our voice and share it.

Chris Meyer was another butterfly hunter, patiently connecting, leading and challenging, turning on lights in a way that made everyone in the room see the possibilities that lay just ahead.

The ideas are there. It might take patience to nurture them.

[HT to Lisa DiMona.]

NOVEMBER 25, 2020

Subconscious pre-filtering
It’s entirely possible to believe that your ideas come from the muse, and your job is to simply amplify them. And that successful people are lucky because the muse keeps giving them useful and powerful ideas.

I’m not sure that’s what successful people do. All of us get an endless supply of ideas, notions and inklings. Successful people, often without realizing it, ignore the ones that are less likely to ‘work’, and instead focus on the projects that are more likely to advance the mission.

It’s possible to get better at this pre-filtering. By doing it out loud. By writing out the factors that you’re seeking, by explaining to someone else how your part of the world works.

Instinct is great. It’s even better when you work on it.

You can find more on this in The Practice, my new bestselling book.

I’m blogging about it weekly on Medium. And talking about it on some extraordinary podcasts around the world.

And we just started the eighth season of my podcast, Akimbo.

NOVEMBER 24, 2020

Today is Worldwide Backup Day
Google is not your friend, it’s a tool.
It’s been 2,702 days since they shut down Google Reader and people still remember.

Or consider that Google can shut you out of all their services with no recourse or appeal possible. All your data, photos, calendars, emails… gone.

But yes, you can back up your data. Do it today…

Visit this page to start the process. It’s free. Hopefully, you’ll never need it. Press a few buttons and back up your data to a cloud service so that it’s in two places–This should happen automatically, but since it doesn’t, it’s worth doing.

The internet was originally designed as a resilience machine, designed to heal itself and work around interruptions. And the essence of it was a distributed, peer-to-peer network that worked precisely because it was open. As data is hoarded, manipulated and monetized, that original intent has been turned upside down.

Resilient systems don’t have to trend toward monopoly. In fact, it’s better when they don’t. And don’t forget to backup your data.

[PS the post from earlier today was skewed by homonyms. Thanks to alert readers for pointing it out… sorry about missing it, but the metaphor is still worth thinking about.]

NOVEMBER 23, 2020

Smart, generous and kind
The Ngram tracks words used in books over the last 200 years. Here’s what a million authors and a billion readers think:


Kindness matters.

[Update: I’m realizing that kind has more homonyms than the other two words, and yet the idea still resonates… Pelayo in Spain recommends this alternative which makes it even more clear!]


Are you stalling?
I have a little wooden plaque with those three words on it.
And of course, the answer is often “yes.”

If you’re waiting on an unavoidable delay, then you’re not stalling. If you’re making things better in a way that the customer will notice, then you’re not stalling. If you’re finding that the spaces in between are giving you joy and sustaining you, then you’re not stalling.

But…

If you’re holding back and looking for a reason why, and that reason is replaced by another reason, then… you might be stalling.

NOVEMBER 22, 2020

Qarrtsiluni
This is the Inuit word for “sitting together in the darkness, quietly, waiting for something creative or important to occur.”

Of course, this works.

The only difficult part is doing it. We’re buzzy people, inundated with noise, using it to hide from the important work that’s right in front of us.

NOVEMBER 21, 2020

A paradox of community, belief and reality
Belief happens when we combine community with emotion. It’s a way for us to see and understand the world, at the same time that we engage with some of the people around us. Belief is a symptom of shared connection, and community makes us human.

Reality, on the other hand, is widely experienced and consistent. Gravity doesn’t care if you believe in it or not, it’s still here. And that jar of jelly beans has the same number of beans in it, no matter how many times we count them.

When belief doesn’t match our experience of reality, stress occurs.

This stress can surprisingly make community stronger. There’s very little community among people who believe that the Earth is a sphere, no meetings or conventions of the round Earth people. That’s because you don’t need belief to know that the Earth is round.

There is a long history of building community cohesion by encouraging members to ignore the facts of the world around them.

The disconnect between what’s out there and the emotions that lead us to believe something that isn’t real can actually make a community tighter. Sometimes, the disconnect between belief and reality is precisely the point. When the disconnect gets really large and the community becomes more insulated, cults arise.

But in our modern age, this stressful disconnect between belief and reality also makes it difficult to spread the word. The outsider may be hesitant to sign up for the stress that belief in non-real things can cause.

As more and more information is just a click away, and as our culture fractures into a long-tail of filter bubbles, the chasms between belief and reality become more profound. But beliefs change, and reality persists, and so the cycles continue.

NOVEMBER 20, 2020

Entitlement fails
An attitude of entitlement doesn’t increase the chances you’ll get what you want.
And it ruins the joy of the things you do get.

Win or lose, you lose.

NOVEMBER 19, 2020

The ocean is made of drops
That’s easy to say but hard to visualize.
Even a puddle has more drops than we can count.

It’s got to be difficult to be a drop.

And yet…

What else could the ocean be made of?

NOVEMBER 18, 2020

“Until further notice”
Of course, every rule, every announcement and every policy is in place until further notice.

We say it as a form of throat clearing. A way to make the announcement seem more official and specific. We repeat the redundant as a form of gift wrap, a way to be sure that it feels both urgent and impersonal.

“May I have your attention please” is another wasted phrase that is actually self-cancelling on inspection. In this case, it acknowledges that attention is being taken, whether you want to loan it out or not.

This patina of bureaucratic civility exists to let the bureaucrat off the hook. But it also is a signal to the listener that an official is speaking up. We should use it (or not use it) with full knowledge of the signal we’re sending.

It’s the seat belt training video, the do not remove tag on our mattress, the ‘your call is important’ filler on hold and the ritual of singing a not-very-good song to people we care about every single year.

If you look around the built world, you’ll find these tropes and filigrees just about everywhere. As media changes, we strip away the old ones and invent new ones to fill their spot. Use them (or not) as a way of sending a message of awareness and authority.

NOVEMBER 17, 2020

The right answer
Which is better: Feeling like you were right the first time or actually being correct now?

When we double down on our original estimate, defend our sunk costs and rally behind the home team, we’re doing this because it’s satisfying to feel as though we were right all along.

On the other hand, if the outcome is important and we’re brave enough to learn, we can say, “based on what we know now, we should change course, because the other path is actually a better way to go forward.”

More often than not, there are moments when we’re wrong. We can either acknowledge that we were wrong yesterday, or we can curse ourselves by choosing to be wrong going forward.

Flexibility in the face of change is where resilience comes from.

NOVEMBER 16, 2020

If it were easy…
Then everyone else would find it easy as well. Which would make it awfully difficult to do important work, work that stands out, work that people would go out of their way to find.

When difficulties arise, it might very well be good news. Because those difficulties may dissuade all the people who aren’t as dedicated as you are.

It pays to seek out the hard parts.

NOVEMBER 15, 2020

Where is your ifthen?
We all have them.
“If ____ happens, then I’ll do ____.”

If this emergency passes, then I’ll take a break.

If this customer closes, then I’ll invest in my education.

If we get this finished, then we’ll focus on that.

Too often, the ifthen is nothing but a stall. As a result, we burn trust, and worse, postpone a future we’d like to spend time living in.

Take your ifthen’s seriously. The future always happens sooner than we expect.

NOVEMBER 14, 2020

The incoming
Standing at my desk this summer, it had just turned 10 am, and I realized that I’d already:
Heard from an old friend, engaged with three team members on two continents, read 28 blogs across the spectrum AND found out about the weather and the news around the world.

Half my life ago, in a similar morning spent in a similar office, not one of those things would have been true.

The incoming (and our ability to create more outgoing) is probably the single biggest shift that computers have created in our work lives. Sometimes, we subscribe or go and fetch the information, and sometimes it comes to us, unbidden and unfiltered. But it’s there and it’s compounding.

One option is to simply cope with the deluge, to be a victim of the firehose.

Another is to make the problem worse by adding more noise and spam to the open networks that we depend on.

A third might be, just for an hour, to turn it off. All of it. To sit alone and create the new thing, the thing worth seeking out, the thing that will cause a positive change.

NOVEMBER 13, 2020

The gift of results
When Ignaz Semmelweis pioneered statistics in order to save countless women from dying in childbirth, his fellow doctors refused to believe him. They ignored his work, didn’t wash their hands and it was another twenty years before his insights on the spread of disease were adopted.

We live in a faster, more competitive world than he did.

When Jethro Tull wrote about the rotation of crops, many farmers continued to do things in the old way. Over time, though, the yields don’t lie. You don’t have to like the idea, but you can see that it works.

Results show up. They’re easy to see, easy to measure and they persist.

The bridge falls down or it doesn’t. Market share goes up or it doesn’t.

We can view results as a threat, or see them as an opportunity. It depends on whether we’re defending a little-understood status quo or seeking to make things work better.

Results don’t care about our explanation. We need a useful explanation if we’re going to improve, but denying the results doesn’t change them.

As the world has become ever more filled with results, it has crowded out each individual’s personal narrative of how the world works. Particularly in times of change and negative outcomes, this can cause a lot of distress.

Our narrative is ours, and it informs who we are and the story we tell ourselves.

Beliefs are powerful. They’re personal. They can have a significant impact on the way we engage with ourselves and others. But results are universal and concrete, and no matter how much we’d like them to go away, there they are.

When people talk about how modernity has changed humanity, they often overlook the fundamental impact that results have had. Competitive environments create more results, at greater speed, and those results compound over time.

We still need a narrative and we still need our individual outlook. But over the last century, we’ve had to make more and more room for the systems that create results. Our shared reality demands it.

NOVEMBER 12, 2020

Second cousins
Being smart often has little to do with being persuasive.

And yet we often assume that one leads to the other.

We spend years and years educating people to do well on tests in the belief that this will make them smart.

And we assume that they’ll figure out the persuasive stuff on their own.

We conflate the two on a regular basis, assuming that charisma or followers or influence is somehow aligned with insight, foresight, and learning.

The good news is that being persuasive is a skill. If you’re smart, we’ll all benefit if you’ll also invest the effort to find a way to lead.

NOVEMBER 11, 2020

A theatre of dominance
Organized sports often turn into a play about status roles and dominance. Bullfighting, pro wrestling, even hockey, are about who’s winning, who’s losing and who’s in charge.

But they are also theatres of affiliation. The fans celebrate their unity as well as their divisions. The pomp and circumstance are a form of culture. There are insiders and outsiders, and the right way and the wrong way.

When a sumo champ breaks protocol, the crowd isn’t happy. When the people next to you are wearing the same jersey as you, neither of you is headed onto the ice, but both of you feel like you belong.

The symphony has the same elements. The affiliation of players in tune, of familiar music from the canon, of an audience that knows not to clap between movements. But it’s also the dominance of the European-trained conductor, bringing his passion and will to bend the performance to his wishes.

One way to understand what’s happening in the office or on the news is to look at it through these lenses.

The theatre of affiliation happens when groupthink sets in, when we’re wondering what others will think of a new idea, when we go out of our way to play the long game and to be kind and thoughtful. “People like us do things like this.”

And this always dances with the theatre of dominance, when we see someone shortcutting to gain market share, or subjecting a co-worker to abuse in a meeting. It leads to a reinforcement of caste and stereotypes, and yet it persists. “I’m winning.”

Affiliation is the infinite game of culture building, sustainability, cooperation and resilience.

Dominance is an instinct as well, something we see in many successful species, and particularly when the game that’s being played is tweaked to reward dominators, it often returns.

When you’re in one mode, it’s tempting to believe that everyone else is too. But depending on which pocket of culture you’re in, which ticket you bought, what state your persona is in, it might be that you’re not seeing what others are seeing.

Getting in sync requires doing the emotional work of changing state long before we start using words and rational concepts. When in doubt, assume the people over there might be engaging in a different sort of theatre than you are.

NOVEMBER 10, 2020

Launches and orbits
The launch is fraught. It takes a lot of energy to get the thing started, and the orbit is the goal–there are still satellites up there, circling, decades after launching.

Even after twenty of them, a book launch feels uncertain. After all, you’re asking people to add one more thing to their reading list, something that no one has read yet. It’s an act of trust and kindness and support that I still don’t take for granted.

Thank you.

Launches are often characterized by a rush, a series of shortcuts and not enough patience. But it turns out that a successful launch often takes years, because the leaps we ask people to take require trust and confidence.

When I look down the list of people who pre-ordered, who supported the multi-pack, who read the blog, who spread the word, who took the workshop, who shared their ideas, who lent their voices, who asked good questions, who believed… I’m overwhelmed.

Thank you.

The Practice launched a week ago, (only a week? for many of us, it feels like months ago). It was one of my most successful book launches, hitting #1 in its categories and getting a great response from readers.

I appeared on some terrific podcasts (you can listen to some of them here) and even worked with thousands of you in a workshop setting.

The work you ship, the practice you engage in, your own cycle of launches and orbits–it creates our culture and makes things better. I’m grateful for your attention and for the ability to do this work with you.

Also! today at 3:30 EST (UTC-5) , I’ll be talking with my friend and colleague Bernadette Jiwa live on various social media channels (find us here). She’ll be talking about how the stories we tell change the world, taking your questions and inviting you to check out the latest iteration of the Story Skills Workshop.

NOVEMBER 9, 2020

One difference between science and art
If you can’t replicate the work and get the same outcome, then it’s not science.

If you can replicate the work and get the same outcome, it’s not art.



PS Tuesday is the First Priority deadline for the first altMBA sessions of 2021. I just attended commencement from the 43rd and 44th sessions, and it continues to be thrilling to watch what people who care are capable of producing. Akimbo is now an independent B corp, and with more than 5,000 altMBA alumni around the world, it’s making a difference.

I hope you can check it out.


Principle is inconvenient
A principle is an approach you stick with even if you know it might lead to a short-term outcome you don’t prefer. Especially then.

It’s this gap between the short-term and the long-term that makes a principle valuable. If your guiding principle is to do whatever benefits you right now, you don’t have principles of much value.

But it’s the valuable principles that pay off, because they enable forward motion, particularly when it feels like there are few alternatives. We embrace a culture based on principles because it’s that structure and momentum that enables connection and progress to happen in the first place.

NOVEMBER 8, 2020

And a pony at your birthday party
Do you remember your first birthday party? That’s pretty unlikely, even if you have pictures to remind you.

So what’s all the hoopla for? Why the cake and the pony and the rest?

It’s pretty clear that it wasn’t for you. It was for your parents and their circle of supporters and friends. A rite of passage and thanks and relief, all in one.

Many of the interactions we have that are ostensibly for us are actually for other people. Once we can see who it’s for, it’s a lot easier to do it well.

NOVEMBER 7, 2020

The words matter
Every time we have the floor we have the chance to create connection (or to sever it). We can open up possibility or we can close it.

Sometimes, we share our answer thinking it might be the answer, when it might have been better to ask a generous question instead.

Being funny by being cutting isn’t funny, that’s just an excuse.

It’s hard to take words back, and we use so many of them, it’s likely that there are some we’d prefer to retrieve. Note to self: better to slow down a little instead.

NOVEMBER 6, 2020

The unspoken questions
Before we make a decision, we wonder about our dreams, our stories and our needs. Some of the things we wonder about, even if we don’t verbalize them to ourselves:
What will I tell my friends?

What will I tell my boss?

What is everyone else doing?

Will this make me feel dumb?

Is this good for me right now?

Does it help my family?

Is it scarce?

Does it raise my status?

Will this help me be part of a group I care about?

Would my mom be proud of me?

Will I get blamed?

Is there a shortcut?

Is it safe?

Is it thrilling?

How will I feel if they run out?

Will it make the pain go away?

Is it forbidden?

[And then, maybe, if we’ve got many choices, “how much does it cost?”]

NOVEMBER 5, 2020

The spaces in-between
It’s comforting to have a snappy answer or the certainty of knowing not only how it is, but how it happened and precisely what happens next.
But sometimes we don’t know.

And in those moments, we are left with our first principles. To focus on possibility, on the change we seek to make, on showing up as an even better version of the person we hope to be.

Especially when it’s hard.

NOVEMBER 4, 2020

A new book and some excitement to go with it
Today is ship day for my new book, The Practice.
Medium asked me to do a weekly series about creativity. The first two posts are now live.

Also! I’m doing a Facebook Live (to be reposted later on Insta, etc) today at 4:15 New York time. Come with your questions about the magic of shipping creative work.

This week, some of the best podcasters I’ve ever met are rolling out podcast interviews on creativity that might resonate with you…

And, for the next 24 hours, you can enter for a chance to win some rare, out of print or simply fun backlist items from my attic of past projects and provocations.

Find the form to enter right here. There are only 100 prizes, and I’ll do my best to deliver before the end of the year.

Included in the prize pool:

The behemoth, an 18-pound, 800-page collector’s item.

The titan, the follow-up, similar in size, and profusely illustrated with amazing photos from Thomas Hawk.

Sleeves of alternate collectible covers for This is Marketing.

The super-rare LP edition of my reading of two of my past books. These are beautiful, even if you don’t own a record player. Winners get five copies to share.

The cut crystal Purple Cow award, and just a few of the scarce remaining Purple Cow milk cartons.

Several other cool items, too scarce to mention here.

You can’t win if you don’t enter. I started doing online contests and sweepstakes in 1990, so this is a special thirtieth-anniversary celebration. You get a bonus entry for every copy of The Practice you buy.

Here are some pics of available goodies:





















“The magic is that there is no magic.” Simply the satisfaction of doing the work.

NOVEMBER 3, 2020

The useful crisis
The Cuban Missile Crisis was an actual crisis. The world was hours away from being annihilated–gone forever, all of us.

Since then, the media has exploited (and invented) crises on a regular basis, now more than ever, often at the expense of focusing our attention on chronic conditions, which are the real challenges.

Today’s election day in the US, and the whole world is watching. Even with mail-in voting, it’s mostly a one-day thing. A useful crisis, a chance to encourage millions of people to get involved, at least a little. The last time around, only 80,000 votes separated the outcome, a truly tiny fraction of the population who didn’t show up and vote but could have.

While the Tonkin crisis accelerated the US’s involvement in Vietnam, it was the chronic and persistent war that truly took a toll. We notice the amplified moments but the long haul is often invisible. And media like Twitter make it 140 times worse.

A crisis doesn’t have to be a negative event. A wedding is a crisis–one ceremony, one day, over and done. All eyes, all attention, all on this moment. That’s why we do it–even though the chronic condition of the marriage itself is always more important. And we do the same thing for job interviews and product launches as well.

Today’s the launch day for my new book, The Practice. People asked me why I would waste the focus and crisis of a launch on a day when everyone is going to be talking about something else. I did it partly because I know you can handle two things at once, and would probably want to find something to fill your time while you were waiting for the results. And mostly because The Practice is about the long haul, the persistent posture of creation and possibility. I’d love to have an exciting launch day (I’ll be posting some hoopla details later today) but I’m far more interested in what the people who go first do with the book after they read it. Tomorrow, next month and next year.

It doesn’t make sense to waste a good crisis, but it also hurts us when we are only concerned with them.

Please vote today if you can, and then let’s all try to find a way to work together to figure out how to focus on the persistent, chronic conditions that we can each do something about.


[Video by Fernando Lazzari]


What do you get and what does it cost?
This is pretty easy to discuss when we’re discussing buying an ice cream sandwich. It costs $2, you get an ice cream sandwich.

It gets a little more nuanced when we talk about what $2 means to you, what the freedom to choose is worth, the guilt or joy you get from eating a sugary dessert all on your own, the fun of sharing it with a friend, your narrative about hormones and livestock… Maybe it’s not that easy after all.

And so we get to the sometimes subtle calculation of voting.

Tomorrow in the US is voting day. It apparently doesn’t cost anything to vote–just a few minutes of time. But it actually can feel like it costs a lot, because it comes with cognitive load, with decision making, with a feeling of power or futility or connection or loneliness. If you don’t vote, it’s a lot easier to deny any responsibility.

A year ago, I was standing in line at an ice cream stand in Syracuse, NY. A person in front of me took more than two minutes (a long time when it’s a long line!) to make up their mind, and even let two other people jump ahead because it was so hard (which means, also, so fun) to be undecided. That’s a choice, and the date certain of voting pushes us to move through that state…

But along with these costs, voting comes with the feeling of participation. Even if you don’t think your vote counts, others do. People are paying attention, and over time, it adds up.

And it comes with the feeling of generosity, because you can vote to advance the well-being of someone who needs to be seen even more than you do.

If you’re a habitual non-voter, it’s worth wondering for a moment about the calculation you use to keep that streak going, and perhaps consider exploring the feelings that come when you break that streak.

Not just tomorrow, but in all the ways, and on all the days, when we don’t speak up, don’t raise our hands and don’t vote.

NOVEMBER 2, 2020

Omission, commission and the places in between
If you accidentally leave the gate open and foragers end up destroying 1000 acres of crops, the guilt feels different than if you went and actively burned down the fields, even if the damage is identical.

In our society, we treat errors of omission differently from the decision to commit a crime.

But there are countless places in between.

What if you should have known?

What if you could have known but didn’t bother to do the work?

What if you promised you’d do the work to find a path, but then didn’t?

One reason we hide is that we’re afraid of being on the hook, of making a promise we can’t keep, of showing up and taking responsibility for our intentional actions. But, as information becomes more widespread and our leverage increases, we’ve already put ourselves on the hook. Could, should and would not only rhyme, they exist on a continuum.

NOVEMBER 1, 2020

Absolute value
It’s time for the annual window painting competition in my little town. Store owners allow kids to have a 2 foot by 4 foot piece of window to paint a scary/funny/punny Halloween billboard, and the winners get a certificate.

And every year, parents not only help, they often take over and do all the work.

The thing is: Not one of these entries, ever, has been the best in the world. None has been perfect or even worthy of hanging in a gallery. It’s not a worldwide absolute competition. It’s relative.

Relative to what you’re capable of.

You’re not running the race against everyone else. More often than not, you’re simply running it against yourself.

[And as long as we’re thinking about the Grateful Pumpkin and seasonal reasons to be thankful, a reminder that in the US, Thanksgiving is in three weeks. The annual Thanksgiving Reader is available for free download and easy at-home printing. Designed by Alex Peck, he and I are offering it to families so that we can create a new tradition. This year more than ever, even if it’s by Zoom.]

Don’t eat cheap chocolate!

OCTOBER 31, 2020

A/B/C and the problem with skipping a step
Striving to be asleep is a difficult leap. On the other hand, committing to lying still is do-able. Lying still makes it more likely you’ll get to the next step.

Hoping to grow your business by word of mouth by willing your customers to talk about you isn’t nearly as productive as making something worth talking about.

Skipping a step is frustrating and usually futile.

OCTOBER 30, 2020

The successful scientist
The scientific method is the most powerful invention humans have ever created. It’s not just for people in white coats and in labs. The scientific method has changed what we wear, what we eat, the health of our families, the way we earn a living–the world as we know it is a result of a simple process of hypothesis, testing and explanation.

Unfortunately, school and other systems in our world focus on just one or two of the elements necessary to do it well.

Know the rules, maxims and outcomes that came before. Do the reading, score well on the test.
Understand the thinking behind these rules, so you can dive deeper and either change the rules or expand on them.
Do tests that others haven’t thought of or that people don’t think will work. Intentionally create falsifiable hypotheses, knowing that you might be wrong, and then go test them.
Publish your results so that others can examine your work and improve it. Show your work. Invite correction and improvement.
Explain what you did clearly so that it becomes part of the canon, so it can be used by others, until it’s replaced by something even more useful.
There are very few contentious arguments in our world today that couldn’t be more quickly resolved if all involved were willing to act in good faith and work their way through the steps together.

Because if you seek to lead or to change minds, if you’re working for better, then you’re a scientist.

OCTOBER 29, 2020

“All anecdote and no data”
That’s a criticism, of course. A report, study or testimony that’s all anecdote with no data carries little in the way of actionable information.

On the other hand, if you want to change people’s minds, “all data and no anecdote” isn’t going to get you very far.

We act on what we understand, we understand what fits into our worldview and we remember what we act on.

OCTOBER 28, 2020

Back in the tube
There are two kinds of mistakes.

One is the sort where failure is not noticeable because failure means that you didn’t engage with an audience. If you do an art show and no one comes, no one realizes that your art show failed.

The other is harder to walk away from. You can’t put the toothpaste back in the tube. When you engineer collateralized debt obligations that merge together mortgage streams, inextricably linking the healthy ones with the others, it’s a mistake with real consequences.

Confusing the two types of errors is a recipe for tragedy. If we can figure out how to organize and plan for the first type of resilient failure, it’s far easier to experiment.

OCTOBER 27, 2020

Misgivings
If you’re not having any second thoughts at all, it’s probably because you’re not thinking it through enough.

The hallmark of the true believer is that there’s no room for judgment. For everyone else, misgivings are a sign that you’re carefully considering the problem at hand.

OCTOBER 26, 2020

Popular vs. good
They’re not the same.

We often strive to have both, but that’s unlikely. The price of having one almost certainly involves losing the other.  We often end up compromising something to get both and fail.

Better to have one than neither.

OCTOBER 25, 2020

The thing about sunk costs
Tomorrow is another opportunity.

There are thirty people over there who are just waiting for you to help connect them, lead them or make things better. But if you’re still defending the stuck project over here, the one you put so much into, you won’t be able to show up for them.

Customers, partners, clients and students who need your voice or your product aren’t going to benefit from it because you’re working so hard to dig yourself out of a previous hole, a situation that is now harder than ever to work your way through.

It’s easy to focus on the problem right in front of us, and to decide that this problem, and only this problem, is the problem for us to solve. But there’s a cost to everything, and the opportunity lost when you’re doing this is just as real, even when you don’t notice it.

Of course, we don’t create contribution by flitting from one thing to another whenever things get difficult. But we also sell ourselves short (and harm the people we’d be able to serve) if we’re unable to quit a project that’s gone sideways.

What happened yesterday already happened. It’s a gift and an asset from your previous self. You don’t have to accept if you don’t want to.

OCTOBER 24, 2020

Big business vs. small business
Small companies create almost all the jobs. They are the insurgents, the agents of change.

Big companies are a backbone, reliable providers of goods and services. Big companies operate at a scale that most of us can’t even imagine.

The two points of view often conflict. And each can learn from the other.

Net neutrality is an argument between freedom of innovation by small business vs. control from big business.

Campaign finance reform is an argument against big companies and their leaders buying the outcomes of elections.

It’s not always about capitalism vs. the alternative. It’s often about the status quo vs. what’s next.

Worth noting: A small business is not a big business that hasn’t grown up yet. It’s different. A small business has an owner, someone who can make decisions without meetings, who can listen to customers and who can embrace the work at hand.

If you run a small business, I hope you’ll check out the new workshop from my friend and colleague Ramon Ray. The folks at Akimbo are working with Ramon to help connect small business people on their journey to making a bigger impact. It works better together.

OCTOBER 23, 2020

“That’s not what I meant”
Disagreements among people who mean well usually begin with that emotion.

You meant to say something or agree to something, but the “other side” didn’t hear it that way.

That’s enough for a customer to walk away forever. That’s enough for a lawsuit. Because denying the experience of the other person doesn’t open the door for re-connection.

Forward motion is possible if we can extend the sentence to, “That’s not what I meant, but that must be what you heard, how do we fix this? Will you help me make things right again?”

If we can agree on intent, it’s a lot easier to figure out how to move forward.

OCTOBER 22, 2020

Cross the bridge and join the dragons
53 years ago, early in her career, Joni Mitchell recorded this song.

It’s not something most people will want to listen to often. Shortly after that, she became the one and only Joni Mitchell. But first, she had dues to pay.

That’s the work of practice and discernment and skill. You’re not born with genius, it’s a skill.

You might have to sing more than one song like this before you end up with the art that resonates with your audience.

OCTOBER 21, 2020

The limited-edition pre-launch of The Practice
My new book ships in two weeks.

It’s about the human process of shipping creative work, regardless of what sort of job we have. It’s about trusting yourself. Mostly, it’s about getting back to becoming the person you seek to be.

You can find details on the book (and links to pre-order) here.

For the true fans, I’ve put together exactly 400 sets of limited-edition swag. If you order the special 12-copy set of the book from Porchlight, you’ll also get a large handful of cool stuff, including a hand-lasered writer’s block, a set of letterpress hand-printed pages, six (of 12) collectible storage packs and a magical surprise that contains actual magic.

If you’re the sort of person who likes to go first, or wants to share a book with your peers, today’s the day. There aren’t many…

[update 10.21 end of day–now a bestseller on Amazon, thank you. And the 12-packs are sold out…]













OCTOBER 20, 2020

“I hate this restaurant”
Back in the old days, I took someone to a local Italian restaurant for dinner.

As we looked over the menu, complete with regional specialties and handmade pastas, he started to sulk. With a sullen look, he said, “I want a hamburger and french fries.”

Somehow, the patient kitchen staff figured out how to produce this out of thin air, and a tantrum was narrowly averted. But I’ve been thinking about that interaction a lot.

In his mind, “restaurant” meant, “a place where I can get a hamburger and french fries.” If you look at many 1 star reviews (of books, of music, of restaurants) this is precisely what you’re going to see. A mismatch of expectations. A mismatch that is blamed, completely, on the person who created the work, not the critic.

It doesn’t matter that the thing was clearly marked. It doesn’t matter that the thing was extraordinarily well-produced. And it doesn’t matter if just about everyone else experiencing it was thoroughly delighted.

Because for this spoiled, under-informed and impatient patron, it failed.

This failure comes from a few contributing factors, all amplified by our culture:

First, you can’t know if you’re going to like an experience until you experience it. All you know is your understanding of what was on offer. And because there are so many choices and there’s so much noise, we rarely take the time to actually read the label, or we get carried away by the coming attractions, or we just don’t care enough to pay attention until we’re already involved.

[And marketers are complicit, because in the face of too much noise, they hype what’s on offer and overpromise…]

Second, because many people are afraid. They’re afraid of the new and even more than that, afraid of change. Most people in our culture would like to be entertained not transformed, lectured at instead of learning.

Third, the double-edged sword of giving everyone a microphone means that we’ve amplified the voices of dissent at the same time we’ve given people a chance to speak up about their desires. This means that mass culture is far more divisive than it ever was before, and it also means that bubbles of interest are more likely to be served.

And so the fork in the road:

You can either turn your operation into a cross between McDonald’s and Disney, selling the regular kind, pandering to the middle, putting everything in exactly the category they hoped for and challenging no expectations…

Or you can do the incredibly hard work of transgressing genres, challenging expectations and seeking out the few people who want to experience something that matters, instead of something that’s merely safe.


Better and cheaper
That’s a pretty powerful combination. Some customers gravitate toward the option that offers ease, quality and convenience, while others prefer low price. If you can do both…

One way we’ve seen that done is with scale. Many people prefer the big box store to the local merchant. Not only is it often cheaper, but the selection might be dramatically better, the parking might be easier and in some rare cases, the service is better as well. How is this possible? Because volume pays off in almost every way that matters to the customer.

Another way is with proprietary insight. If a company has a production process, a patent or some other barrier, they can often deliver something faster and cheaper… a barrier that a competitor without that shortcut can’t overcome.

A third way is with herculean effort. When the people who work on the team simply care more. Caring is work, and caring is in short supply. An organization staffed with smart people who care can often run circles around a lazier competitor.

Most of the time, though, you’re probably unable to rely on one of these approaches. If that’s the case, the next best option is to choose. To actually be better (regardless of price) or to actually be cheaper. But pretending that you have both doesn’t work very well.

It costs a lot but it’s worth more than it costs.

OCTOBER 19, 2020

Unacceptable
The word has a very specific meaning, which is why it’s so powerful.

If we accept behavior that’s unacceptable, we’re compromising on something that we thought was too important to compromise on.

And that’s how we end up with the unacceptable becoming commonplace.

OCTOBER 18, 2020

Two kinds of limbo
Uncomfortable limbo happens when we’re seeking firm footing and there isn’t any. The discomfort comes from not knowing, from our unlimited desire to get through it to the other side.

And comfortable limbo is a place to hide. We lull ourselves into complacency, because the limbo of being in between feels safe, with no responsibilities.

Amazingly, two different people can experience the same limbo in totally different ways. It’s not the limbo that’s different, it’s us.

OCTOBER 17, 2020

We like what we choose
Not the other way around.

It feels safer to say that we’re born with talents and gifts, that we have a true calling, that we’re looking for what connects with our passion.

That’s not useful (because it means you spend a lot of time shopping around) but it’s also not true.

New research confirms that random choices lead to preferences, and then it follows that preferences lead to habits and habits lead us to become the person we somehow decide we were born to be.

If you had grown up somewhere else or some time else, there’s little doubt that you’d prefer something else. The things we think we need are simply the things we’re used to.

And if you like what you like simply because you have a pattern, that means that you might be able to like something else if you could develop new patterns.

In short: If we commit to loving what we do, we’re more likely to find engagement and satisfaction. And if what we do changes, we can choose to love that too.

OCTOBER 16, 2020

Two kinds of momentum
There’s the unalterable momentum of physical objects as understood by physics: objects in motion tend to remain that way. A fast-moving baseball hitting your head hurts more than a lobbed one.

But usually, momentum is only conceptual, and it’s based on our habits and our difficulty in understanding (and ignoring) sunk costs. We stick with a pattern, a leader, an employee or a project much longer than we should.

The behavior that keeps someone from getting hired is trivial compared to what it takes to get fired. And at some level, that makes sense. When we’re not committed yet, the cost of looking around and switching our choice is small. But once we’ve emotionally committed to a cause or a project or a person, the cost of change is high, partly because it involves feeling as though we made a mistake.

But compounding that initial choice by doubling down on it is the actual mistake.

Digging a deeper hole rarely gets us to the other side.

OCTOBER 15, 2020

Show no work
There are two sorts of projects.

In the first, you’ll need to show your work. Show us why the logic holds up. Tell us how this has happened before. Explain the best practices you’ve learned from and the standards you’re following.

In the second, you’re taking a leap. Simply guessing or going on instinct.

Either path can work, the problem is when we confuse them. Perhaps we’re doing something that is based on what’s come before, but we refuse to examine, measure or compare, insisting that history doesn’t apply. Or worse, when we’re going on instinct and assert that it’s actually a reliable, proven path forward.

If the stakes are high and the outcome needs to be reliable, we hope you’ll be able to show your work.

And when it comes to the part of the project that’s yours and yours alone, the part that isn’t based on what’s come before, show no work. And plan accordingly.

OCTOBER 14, 2020

The power of community and the trap of opt-out
In Colonial America, they had private fire departments. If you didn’t voluntarily pay your dues, the firemen wouldn’t put out a fire–they’d watch your house burn and make sure it didn’t spread to your neighbor’s house. [or this!]

While this is a vivid way to ensure that everyone pays their dues, it’s such an inefficient way to support the fire department that it was replaced with the smarter alternative: a smaller tax on everyone, automatically collected. Even if a few manage to avoid paying their share, the blanket protection, which also leads to fire inspectors and building codes, clearly makes the case for universal protection.

We don’t let citizens opt out of paying their taxes, because community works better when group consensus leads to group action. It’s more efficient to provide services this way, and far more important, it creates a culture of ‘us’, which changes behavior from selfish to generous.

There’s a balance, neither extreme works. It’s up to us to think hard about where the (unstable, hard to find) balance lies.

OCTOBER 13, 2020

Persistently irrational
When people around you do something that makes no sense or is self-defeating, it might not be because they’re stupid.

It’s more likely that they don’t believe what you believe, don’t see what you see or don’t want what you want. It might be different measures of time, of status or desire. If we hope to understand behavior, and ultimately to change it, we need to see the stories behind it.

Because, in many ways, we’re all irrational sometimes.

OCTOBER 12, 2020

Figure and ground
When does it snap into focus?

Because we don’t like to be wrong.

And more than that, we don’t like to be confused.

So when we encounter something new, we pause for a second until we think we get it. Then we lock it in, and it’s ours.

But what if we’re wrong?

What if our understanding of what we encountered wasn’t useful, accurate or true?

Suddenly, there’s a conflict. A conflict between being wrong and being confused. Because the only way to stop being wrong is to be momentarily confused. To jump from one state to another.

The magic is in waiting a few beats before you lock it in. Getting comfortable with ‘confused’ is a stepping stone on the path to becoming wise.

OCTOBER 11, 2020

It turns out that ‘beiger’ isn’t a word
Perhaps it should be, given how much time is spent trying to make things more and more beige.

Bland is not a helpful goal.

The goal could be to become useful, remarkable and worth seeking out. To do something that’s hard to replace, groundbreaking or thrilling. Generous work that makes things better.

Beiger doesn’t help.

OCTOBER 10, 2020

Agreeable
You can be agreeable without agreeing.

In fact, most of the time, we’d rather spend time with people who have a different point of view but are willing to be agreeable nonetheless. It’s far better than the alternative.

OCTOBER 9, 2020

Attitudes are skills
Three words that changed my life.

Once you realize that you can improve, amplify and refine the things that other people call attitudes, you may realize that they are skills.

Which is great news, because becoming better at a skill is something we’re able to do.

Some people call these, “soft skills.” That’s because they’re not easy to measure. But for me, they’re real skills. The skills that actually determine how far we’ll go and how it will feel to work with us as we move forward.

Akimbo is hosting the third Real Skills Conference on Saturday, October 17 from 3 to 5 pm ET. You can find all the details here.

It’s truly a conference. No keynotes, no experts, simply a group of people who want to understand what it means to level up by seeing what’s possible and then deciding to do something about it. If spending an afternoon with people like that in service of making a difference would be helpful, I hope you can join in.


The cold open
No one ever bought anything on an elevator. The elevator pitch isn’t about selling your idea, because a metaphorical elevator is a lousy place to make a pitch.

When you feel like you’re being judged and only have a minute to make a first impression, it’s tempting to try to explain the truth and nuance of who you are, what you’ve done and what you’re going to do in the time it takes to travel a few floors.

That rarely works.

The alternative is the elevator question, not the elevator pitch. To begin a conversation–not about you, but about the person you’re hoping to connect with. If you know who they are and what they want, it’s a lot more likely you can figure out if they’re a good fit for who you are and what you want. And you can take the opportunity to help them find what they need, especially if it’s not from you.

Too often, we feel rejected when in fact, all that’s happened is a mismatch of needs, narratives and what’s on offer.

Instead of looking at everyone as someone who could fund you or buy from you or hire you, it might help to imagine that almost no one can do those things, but there are plenty of people you might be able to help in some other way, even if it’s only to respect them enough to not make a pitch.

No one wants to be hustled.

OCTOBER 8, 2020

The clarity (and risk) of graphs
You might not agree with something you read on the front page of the Wall Street Journal or The New York Times, but at least you understand it. There’s simply no way a sentence like this would make it through the editing process: “Are we not pure? “No, sir!” Panama’s moody Noriega brags. “It is garbage!” Irony dooms a man—a prisoner up to new era.”

And yet, major publications continue to post graphs and charts that are nonsensical and redundant at the same time.

Following their lead, we’re busy putting similar junk in our presentations and brochures as well.

Consider this one from a recent issue of the Times. (click to enlarge)

Why are the months on the vertical axis? Why is it symmetrical, repeating all the information?

Most important… what is it trying to say?

If you don’t know what you’re trying to say, not saying it with a graph is a good way to hide.





OCTOBER 7, 2020

Better clients
That’s it. Two words.

If you’re a freelancer, that’s the hard part. The important part. The part that will open the door to the work you seek to do.

Better clients challenge you. They support you. They spread the word. They pay on time. They pay more and expect more.

Everything else will take care of itself if you focus on getting better clients.

It’s possible, but alas, unlikely, that better clients will simply appear. That outsiders will realize how hard you’re working and will show up. Alas, while it may seem unfair, it turns out that you don’t get better clients simply by working hard. It’s much more productive to take the steps necessary to attract them and keep them instead.



Today’s the best day to sign up for The Freelancer’s Workshop. The team at Akimbo is running it again because it works. It will change the way you do your work, whatever sort of freelancing you do. The Akimbo secret isn’t the videos, it’s the ability to learn together. To be surrounded by your peers, to challenge and be challenged by sharing your insights with people on a similar journey.

OCTOBER 6, 2020

The first rule of the game
“All players must agree to not cheat.”

It’s simply too difficult to enumerate all the rules necessary to engage with people who don’t have goodwill about the process. If you want to cheat, you’ll figure out how to cheat.

When all the players enroll in the spirit of the game, the game works. No matter what the game is.

Cultures and industries change. They often embrace the idea of fairness and a mutual respect for agreed-upon rules. But, over time, the spirit of the game can fade–and it incurs a cost on all the participants, because it’s difficult to move forward if you’re not sure what the rules actually are.

As the stakes have risen in marketplaces–of ideas, of commerce, of governance–it’s become more acceptable to play to win while cheating. To buy a slot on a bestseller list, to coerce or to collude, or to rig an outcome of one sort or another.

No one wants to be hustled.

Breaking the first rule ensures that the rest of the systems will be under great stress. Let’s play or let’s not play. But cheaters aren’t welcome.

OCTOBER 5, 2020

What does it mean to be smart?
Termites and squirrels are successful. They’ve persisted through millennia, and they do things to survive that we could never figure out. They have good instincts. But they’re not smart, not smart in the sense that we hope a leader or a colleague will be.

That kind of smart requires you to be open about how you do your work, how you make choices and the sort of change you seek to make in the world. There’s no need for a smart person to change the story or be evasive or lie, because that’s not part of being smart.

You want a smart heart surgeon, because she can tell you precisely why she’s going to do one procedure instead of another one.

This kind of smart also requires domain knowledge. Smart people have done the reading, and they understand what has come before. They know that history doesn’t repeat itself, but it rhymes. And they’re not interested in making a mistake that they could have avoided with informed preparation.

And a smart person, in addition to revealing their methods and goals, and being alert as to what works, most of all, will change their methods and goals based on what they’ve learned.

Look around you. If you’re seeing buildings that don’t fall down, public health systems that are functioning and products that delight you, it’s because a smart person did the difficult work of creating them.

OCTOBER 4, 2020

Walking away from the idée fixe
“It’s going to be exactly like THIS. It has to be, and I don’t want to hear otherwise. Don’t you believe in me?”

The wedding with the perfect dress, the perfect cake, the perfect groom. It doesn’t matter that the family, the finances and yes, our spouse all don’t want it.

The business with the famous venture capitalist behind it, the IPO, the business model. It doesn’t matter if the people we seek to serve can’t support that.

The musical career with a debut at Carnegie Hall, the glowing reviews and the fancy record deal. It doesn’t matter that the practice and the compromises make you unhappy…

There are industries in place that groom us to do things a certain way. Not because it’s good for us or our mission, but because it’s easier or more profitable for them.

In fact, you can make a ruckus online without venture funding (most people who do don’t have it). In fact, you can have a happy marriage without a big wedding. And in fact, you can happily write your novel without Random House publishing it.

I know you’ve been proving the naysayers wrong for so long that by now it feels like a regular part of the journey. It’s entirely possible, though, that the folks who are pointing out that the industry’s path might not be your path have a point.

For every person who has proven the skeptics wrong, there are a hundred who should have listened to them and done the work they cared about instead of keeping track of the wrong metrics.

Begin at the beginning: who are you serving? What does a successful contribution look like?

OCTOBER 3, 2020

The arc and the arch
They sound similar, but they’re not.

An arc, like an arch, is bent. The strength comes from that bend.

But the arc doesn’t have to be supported at both ends, and the arc is more flexible. The arc can take us to parts unknown, yet it has a trajectory.

An arch, on the other hand, is a solid structure. It’s a bridge that others have already walked over.

Our life is filled with both. We’re trained on arches, encouraged to seek them out.

But an arc, which comes from “arrow,” is the rare ability to take flight and to go further than you or others expected.

OCTOBER 2, 2020

“Well, that’s a dumb idea”
As dumb as selling shoes, an item that comes in 100s of sizes, over the internet.

As dumb as expecting people to find a date or a spouse online.

As dumb as building an encyclopedia that anyone can edit.

You get the idea. Electric cars with 100-mile range, vegan hamburgers, milk made from oats, free college courses…

The next breakthrough is almost certainly going to be something really dumb. Or perhaps merely obvious and unoriginal.

OCTOBER 1, 2020

Lottery thinking
Ironically enough, lottery thinking is a chronic problem.

Lotteries of all sorts grab our attention and change our agenda.

A lottery is an almost random event, a longshot, one that promises to change your life (for the better if it’s a money thing, for the worse if it’s medical, etc.).

The simple and immediate nature of the outcome is an essential part of the lottery’s power.

Getting hit by lightning, finding the perfect job, having a djinni grant three wishes–these are all lotteries.

We spent billions of dollars keeping liquids out of carry-on luggage for no rational reason. It was simply a negative lottery, one that momentarily got the public’s attention and then became part of a narrative about control.

There’s a mismatch between how vivid an outcome is and the odds that make that outcome likely or important to our daily plans. High media attention plus sudden change plus low odds tend to focus our minds more than the opposite.

The problem with lottery thinking is that it takes us away from thinking about the chronic stuff instead. The pervasive, consistent challenge that will respond to committed effort.



PS relevant aside: The other day I was passed by someone who was headed toward me, at high speed, in the middle of the street. He was on an electric skateboard. He had on a face mask, of course, but it was askew. He wasn’t wearing a helmet and he was vaping, all at the same time. Go figure.

SEPTEMBER 30, 2020

Professional wrestling
It’s a theater of status.

Professional wrestling isn’t about wrestling, of course. It’s about who’s up and who’s down. The stated rules are there to be broken by some of the participants, and it’s not professional in any useful sense related to the sport of wrestling.

And the metaphor is powerful in many areas of life.

But we can’t understand the metaphor without understanding the forms of status that are on offer.

There is the status of affiliation. This is about belonging, about knowing and living with the rules. It’s about weaving together the culture and this affiliation leads to a form of popularity.

And then there is the status of dominance. This is about winning at any cost, cheating and subjugating. It’s about unraveling the culture in service of just one aim–victory over the others.

Professional wrestling creates tension between the two forms of status. We know that we all benefit from affiliation, but often are swayed by the avenging dominator if we see ourselves in them.

The theater of status happens in our daily lives. It’s who sits where at the meeting, or who gets to announce that the Zoom session is over. It’s the insurgent and the status quo. It’s the dramatic back and forth between someone who seeks power and someone who is tired of being told what to do.

The successful affiliator doesn’t seek to out-dominate the dominator. Instead, affiliators weave together enough persistent community pressure to get things back on track. And sooner or later, people realize that the triumph of the dominator, while it can be painful, is short-lived.

SEPTEMBER 29, 2020

Here I am
When we say, “here, I made this,” we’re not seeking credit, we’re taking responsibility.

To be seen, to learn, to own it, to do it better next time.

Hiding is too easy. And hiding is a trap.

SEPTEMBER 28, 2020

“What time is your flight?”
Why do cab drivers ask this question?

It’s not like they can get to the airport any faster.

It simply serves to create tension where no tension is helpful.

There are a hundred ways to introduce tension into a conversation. It’s worth doing it with intent, when it serves a function.

SEPTEMBER 27, 2020

The magic of trade-offs
If you make a laptop more powerful, the battery life will suffer and it will get heavier too.

Trade-offs.

If you make a plane bigger, it won’t land at every airport, and it will cost more to fly, even if you don’t sell all the seats.

Another set of trade-offs.

Good engineers don’t whine about trade-offs, because they realize that they’re the entire point.

If there were no trade-offs, we wouldn’t need their help, there would be no interesting problems worth solving.

In our work and our lives, we can train ourselves to say, “oh, good, an interesting trade-off.”

SEPTEMBER 26, 2020

One at a time, over and over
It’s 2018, a special night out. The restaurant shouldn’t have been as disappointing as it was. The room was beautiful, the staff was trying hard, the menu was ambitious–and yet it fell flat.

I realized that the problem is one that many of us face:

All shift long, there’s a lot to do. Another plate to fire, another customer to serve, another plate to clean. And yet this customer doesn’t care about all of that. For any given diner, this may very well be the only time he or she will ever eat here. For any given diner, this dish, this interaction–that’s the only chance you’re going to get.

It doesn’t matter to them that you have 100 tops to serve in the next hour. It doesn’t matter that the last week’s worth of customers all left happy. To this customer, there’s just this one time.

Over and over.

Just this one time.

Over and over.

SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

When can we talk about our systems?
Your team is down by a few points and the game is almost over. What play should you call?

[When can we talk about the system of drafting and training that got your team to this situation in the first place?]

Your back hurts and you think you need surgery to help with the pain.

[When can we talk about the technique you use when you go running every day?]

Your employee shows up late regularly. How can you get them to care more?

[When can we talk about your hiring and leadership approaches?]

There’s racial injustice and unfairness all around us.

[Can we talk about persistent indoctrination around caste?]

You just had an argument with your brother. What’s the best way for him to see that you’re right?

[When can we talk about the narratives your family has developed for generations?]

Universities and local schools are in crisis with testing in disarray and distant learning ineffective…

[When can we talk about what school is for?]

It’s comfortable to ignore the system, to assume it is as permanent as the water surrounding your goldfish. But the fact that we have these tactical problems is all the evidence we need to see that something is causing them, and that spending time on the underlying structure could make a difference.

In a crisis, there’s maximum attention. And in a crisis, we often discard any pretense of caring about systems and resilience and focus only on how to get back to normal. This is precisely why normal is what normal is, because we fight to get back to it.

Changing the system changes everything. And it might be even less work than pouring water on today’s tactical emergency.

SEPTEMBER 24, 2020

What does “shortly” mean?
When a client or customer asks when a project is going to be done, an answer offered might be, “soon” or “shortly.”

Frustration ensues.

It ensues because “shortly,” means: “I’m not sure” and “I don’t want to be responsible” and “you shouldn’t ask.” It creates little in the way of connection, and doesn’t project confidence, authority or even care.

“Shortly” is a one-word way to say, “go away.”

The alternative is to seek to understand and to work to be understood.

If the customer is double-parked, a better answer might be, “it will definitely be less than ten minutes, give me your phone number and I’ll call you the moment it’s done.”

If the engagement manager is trying to juggle priorities and dependencies, a better response might be, “would it make things easier if we could narrow down the delivery date to a two-or-three day span?”

And if the client is simply curious to understand why she hasn’t heard from you and whether you’ve got this under control, perhaps the answer is, “the dilithium crystals shorted out, the new shipment is promised for Monday and in the past, it has taken two weeks after arrival for us to complete the testing.”

It might not be done, but confidence is restored.

You sell what you sell, but you also sell the story we tell ourselves about your relationship with the work (and with us).

SEPTEMBER 23, 2020

Dancing with belief
All of us believe things that might be inconsistent, not based on how the real world actually works or not shared by others. That’s what makes us human.

There are some questions we can ask ourselves about our beliefs that might help us create the change we seek:

Is it working?

If your belief is working for you, if it’s helping you navigate a crazy world and find solace, and if it’s not hurting anyone else, it’s doing what it’s supposed to do. Often, beliefs are about finding human connection and a way to tell ourselves about our place in the world, not as an accurate predictive insight as to what’s actually happening. And beliefs are almost always about community, about being part of something.

Is it helpful?

Air traffic controllers and meteorologists rarely believe that the earth is flat. It’s a belief that would get in the way of being competent at their work. If your beliefs are getting in the way of your work, of your health or the health of those around you, or of your ability to be a contributing citizen, it might be worth examining why you have them and how they got there. Did you decide to have these beliefs or did someone with an agenda that doesn’t match yours promote them?

Is it true?

True in the sense that it’s falsifiable, verifiable, testable and predictive. Falsifiable means that the belief is specific enough that something contrary to the belief could be discovered (“there are no orange swans” is a falsifiable belief, because all we need to do is find one orange swan). It’s not necessary for a belief to be scientifically true, in fact, it undermines the very nature of belief to require evidence. Once there’s evidence, then whatever is true is true, whether or not you believe it.

Do you need it to be true?

Which means that much of what we do to somehow prove our beliefs are true is wasted time and effort. If a belief is helping you make your way through the world, if it acts as a placebo and a balm and a rubric, then that’s sufficient. The problems occur when some people use our beliefs to manipulate us, when they prevent us from accomplishing our goals or contributing to the well being of those around us.

What would change your mind?

If we decide that our belief is actually true, we owe it to ourselves to be clear about what would have to happen for us to realize that it’s not. One of the frustrating things about conspiracies and modern memes is that as soon as they’re examined or contradicted, they’re simply replaced with a new variation. It’s one thing to change beliefs because the scientific method shows us a more clear view of what’s happening, it’s totally different to retreat to ever more unrelated stories in the face of reality. Sometimes, it’s easier for people to amend their belief with one more layer of insulation than it is to acknowledge how the world is likely to work.

SEPTEMBER 22, 2020

Crossing from the early adopters to a larger group
I’ve blogged many times about the chasm.

That’s Geoffrey Moore’s term for the gap between the small part of the market populated with people who like to go first, and the larger group of people who want to get involved with something that’s proven, popular and effective.

The early adopters ask, “is it new?”

The early majority ask, “did it work?” and perhaps, “what’s everyone else doing?”

Longtime readers of this blog know that I do my work for early adopters. The smallest viable audience is sufficient to make an impact, and it allows me to focus on the people who are enrolled in the journey forward.

But if you delight the early adopters, they spread the word. That is how the chasm is crossed–not with fancy ads or clever hype, but because the people who are engaged do the generous work of telling the others.

We’re launching the first lessons of the tenth edition of The Marketing Seminar this week. With more than 10,000 alumni, it’s the most popular workshop on the Akimbo platform. And it works. That’s why the 8,000 people who took it after the initial launch decided to join in. Not everyone goes first. Almost no one does. That’s how our culture changes–when the few early adopters tell the others. And so each of us has to persist and continue to show up in the marketplace, doing the work and earning the trust of people who don’t get a thrill out of going first.

People don’t show up when you launch.

They show up when they’re ready.

SEPTEMBER 21, 2020

Time to get back to magic
Most of the time, the phrase is, “it’s time to get back to work.”

This means it’s time to stop being creative, stop dancing with possibility, stop acquiring new insights and inspiration–and go back to the measurable grind instead.

Maybe we’d be better off saying, “I need to get back to making magic.” Because that’s what we’d actually like to be getting paid to create.

SEPTEMBER 20, 2020

“Is that the most important thing?”
If you want to have an argument, to raise tempers or to distract, the easiest thing to do is start bringing up things that are easy to argue about.

Not the things that are important.

Because the important things require nuance, patience and understanding. They require an understanding of goals, of the way the world works and our mutual respect.

If someone keeps coming back to an irrelevant, urgent or provocative point instead, they’re signaling that they’d rather not talk about the important thing.

Which is precisely what we need to talk about.

SEPTEMBER 19, 2020

Getting the joke
“But why is this important?”

When we encounter a fashion, a film or some other cultural artifact that the critical establishment has celebrated, it’s easy to not understand it.

Taste, after all, is unevenly distributed.

But you don’t have to like something to understand why someone else thought it was important.

To move the culture forward, we need to have the empathy to imagine what others are seeing, liking and talking about.

Once you get the joke, you don’t have to laugh at it, but it definitely makes it easier for you to tell the next one.

SEPTEMBER 18, 2020

Questions for the founder
A friend shared a new business idea with me yesterday. Some business model questions came to mind, asked here rhetorically. If you get them right, everything else is easier:

How will you get new paying customers?

Why will your paying customers tell their friends and colleagues?

Will this business work at a scale that you can both achieve and are happy living with?

Is it easy to start?

If it is, what will keep others from starting it?

How do you avoid a race to the bottom where you’re trapped making a cheap commodity as a middleperson?

Will it get easier as you go? Why?

What incentive do customers have to stick with you instead of switching to a cheaper or more convenient choice?

Businesses that are cheap to start, depend on providing a useful service at a cheap margin and are largely fungible or invisible are often difficult to turn into thriving enterprises. Customer traction, the network effect and emotional connection can change this, particularly if you build them in from the start.



SEPTEMBER 17, 2020

The absurdity of a Scrabble hierarchy
People who are very good at Scrabble are not more kind, better judges of character, more facile with soft skills, better long-term thinkers, more fun at parties or much of anything except good at Scrabble.

Of course we don’t decide on who should have positions of authority or who should be trusted based on their skill at Scrabble. It’s simply a game.

Perhaps the same could be true for beauty, celebrity or the acquisition of wealth.

SEPTEMBER 16, 2020

Are you a marketer?
Do you try to persuade people of your point of view?

Do you interact with customers? (Or patients, subscribers, fans or citizens)…

Are you a designer?

Would life be easier if your boss understood you better?

Is there a policy you’d like to change or a candidate you’d like to help elect?

Are you hoping to make things better?

Then you’re a marketer.

Proud of it.

Might as well learn to do it better. Because the work matters.

Today’s launch day for the tenth session of The Marketing Seminar. It’s the most effective, widely proven and popular workshop of its kind. I hope you’ll check it out. (Today’s the best day to look for the purple circle). It’s our last session of the year, and this is a great time to join in. That link gets you a significant time-sensitive discount at checkout.

So far more than 10,000 people in nearly a hundred countries have shown up and connected, contributed and learned to improve their craft.

We’d love to have you join us. (Check out what nearly 100 alumni had to say).

SEPTEMBER 15, 2020

Bad choices
If made freely, a choice feels like the right thing at the time.

But we realize it was a mistake later, once the moment passes. We don’t know now what we learned in the future.

Bad choices can be caused by:

Poor information
Shoddy analysis (including cognitive glitches and reliance on sunk costs)
Peer pressure
Manipulation
Hustle
Power imbalance
Focus on the short run
Indoctrination
Superstition
Unexamined biases
Take a look: each of these is the product of outside forces and can be unlearned and insulated against. The good news is that we can get better at our choices.

SEPTEMBER 14, 2020

“Taking” lessons
What an accurate and horrible term.

It’s hard to imagine that most people would look forward to taking lessons. In the piano or arithmetic or anything else.

You take medicine. You take your punishment. It’s unwanted but grudgingly accepted.

The term gives away the intent behind it.

Learning is different. Learning is something we get to do, it’s a dance, an embrace, a chance to turn on some lights.

You don’t take a workshop. You are part of one.

SEPTEMBER 13, 2020

In support of the hard-working teacher
Sometimes I talk about the education-industrial complex on this blog, rarely with kindness. I captured much of that in Stop Stealing Dreams.

Readers will see that not once have I criticized a hard-working teacher who meant well. That’s because it’s the bureaucratic industrial system that’s at fault here, not the teachers.

Now more than ever, with teachers scrambling with remote learning, personal health and the shifts in our culture, they matter.

Teachers matter because they have the guts to buck the dominant test and measure system. Because they show up with care and energy, and because they lead.

By time spent, what percentage of the typical school experience is spent on: tests, test prep, comportment, homework, memorization, the curriculum and the social pressure of fitting in?

And what percentage is spent on daydreaming, inventing, creating from scratch, doing it without a manual and finding new solutions to difficult problems?

I don’t think it’s an accident that we spend a fortune on high school football and almost nothing on creative writing hackathons.

Change is going to come from parents and from teachers who care. The system defends the system, and the system requires adherence and stability.

The massive shift to remote learning opens the door to slip in the kind of challenging problem solving and connection that we need right now. We have to hurry, though, because surveillance and more testing is probably right around the corner.

SEPTEMBER 12, 2020

The honest mistake vs. the intentional act
Even though the harm may be the same, we’re much more likely to move on from an acknowledged accidental mistake.

Is it because we know that we’ve made honest mistakes ourselves, and the act of forgiving the other person is a way of forgiving ourselves? Or is it because it feels more random and less personal to be impacted by something that was a mistake?

Or perhaps, there’s some sort of reparation when the other person apologizes and works to improve… as if our suffering made a contribution for others who will follow.

In a third situation, a random accident, where there isn’t a perpetrator, it seems as though we’re the most likely to move on. If the cause is a fellow human, somehow we process misfortune differently. The intention is a double injury.

And yet, after the incident, when each of us is faced with the chance to acknowledge that we made an honest mistake, we often compound the problem and turn it into something more like an intentional act, simply because we’ve been taught to avoid taking personal responsibility.

SEPTEMBER 11, 2020

“Because” vs. “and”
The way you’re feeling… is it because of something that’s going on around you? Or are you simply feeling something and there’s a situation?

One way to determine the difference:

Has this situation ever happened without you (or anyone, for that matter) feeling the way you’re feeling?

[to pick an outdated example, one that someday we might experience again]:

“I’m feeling stressed and overwhelmed because there are ten people waiting for a table at the restaurant and we’re falling behind.”

Except: plenty of people who run restaurants have experienced ten people waiting for a table without feeling stressed and overwhelmed.

It’s not the line that’s causing the stress. It’s your interpretation of the line.

You’re overwhelmed and there’s a line.

SEPTEMBER 10, 2020

Who is good at discovery?
Apple has carefully guarded the podcast directory, persuading podcasters that ‘winning’ here is the shortcut to building a popular podcast. But they’re terrible at introducing podcasts to new listeners, terrible at developing a point of view that enables the industry to thrive or even grow.

Compare this to Netflix. They’re terrific at surfacing content and helping people find things that they end up liking. Netflix, for economic and marketing reasons, has limited the number of ‘shows’ they have to promote, but within their set, they continue to delight. Compare this to YouTube–if you follow the ‘recommended’ path for just a handful or two of clicks, you’ll end up with something banal or violent.

Google built its entire business on the mythology of discovery, persuading millions of entrepreneurs and creators that somehow, SEO would help them get found, at the very same time they’ve dramatically decreased organic search results to maximize revenue.

Bookstores were pretty good at helping people discover new books, and in some situations, Amazon’s even better. Often, though, particularly on the Kindle and with Audible, Amazon does little indeed to help people find serendipity as they think about what to engage with next. (And putting recommendations up for sale to the publishers is shortsighted and greedy, imho).

In music, Roon’s ‘radio’ feature does a startlingly good job of introducing me to songs I thought I already loved, even though I’m hearing them for the first time.

Given how much our culture depends on finding out what’s new, it’s surprising that few have figured out how to be smart about it. If you’re a creator, the truth remains what the truth has been ever since Yahoo tried to sort the web by hand: the best way to make a hit is to build something for the smallest viable audience and make it so good that people tell their peers.

SEPTEMBER 9, 2020

Self-directed, project-based learning
Why do educated people too often fall for foolish scams and conspiracy theories?

The problem is that no one taught us to understand. Instead, we are pushed to simply to memorize. To be educated enough to do well on the test, and then to forget what we were taught, because we never actually learned it.

Understanding opens the door to insight and to comfort with the data. Understanding is the platform we need to go to the next level… memorizing is a fragile house of cards, with no foundation. And the compliance mindset of “will this be on the test?” simply sets us up to believe the next thing that we’re supposed to learn.

We now have a chance to turn this fall’s back-to-school (in the Northern Hemisphere) into self-directed, project-based learning instead of a rush toward compliance and butts in chairs and pencils on tests. Shipping the project, proving it works and then doing it again. Learning by doing. Self-direction unlocks our ability to contribute for a lifetime, whereas preparing for the test ensures that we will always be at the mercy of the person who is giving the test. People are not entitled to their own facts–and understanding helps us discover the ones that matter.

From the age of five, many kids are capable of self-directed, project-based learning if we’re willing to turn off the TV and accept that the process won’t immediately lead to sought-after standardized test results. We can create a pattern of teaching people to be curious because curiosity is an engine for learning… it is less predictable but far more powerful than the current alternative: Creating a desire to get it over with combined with the ability to believe whatever the person in power tells us to believe.

Learning opens the door to the future we’d like to live in.

SEPTEMBER 8, 2020

Toward tired
If this was a blog post about running, I’d definitely be teaching things that would make you tired.

And if you want to learn anything about making a difference, being creative or leading, you should ask the person teaching to cover things that will make you afraid.

Because just as you have to figure out where to put the tired when you run a marathon, you’ll need to figure out where to put the fear when you do work that matters.

SEPTEMBER 7, 2020

Optimism as a choice
If your team is up by thirty points at halftime, it’s not optimistic to expect that you’re going to win–it’s a realistic assessment.

Optimism is an attitude and a choice. It involves context and focus. We’re not deluding ourselves with the reassurance that everything is going to be okay (because that’s not productive). Instead, we’re committed to finding things we can contribute to, work on and improve. We’re devoted to seeking out useful lessons and to discovering where the benefit of the doubt might be helpful.

Positive thinking doesn’t solve every problem. But it’s a much better tool than negative thinking.

SEPTEMBER 6, 2020

Earned crankiness
When an adult chooses to be cranky, it’s much juicier when it’s accompanied by a feeling of entitlement.

If we know that we deserve the chance to be angry and disappointed, that we’ve earned it, then we can explore the feeling with vigor. No need to worry about whether we’re being self-indulgent, we can go full throttle because it’s our due.

Not only is this an effective way to alienate those around us, but it’s also based on the false assumption that it’s possible to have earned the right to be cranky.

Crankiness isn’t a feature. It’s a bug.

SEPTEMBER 5, 2020

Filling a bottomless hole
For every journey, there are steps along the way.

Tasks that need to be done before you can successfully go on to the next one.

But if one of those tasks is one you can never finish, you’re stuck.

You can never read all the stuff on Twitter or catch up completely on the news or be sure that everything is alright.

Don’t make bottomless holes a checklist task. They’re a sideline, something to work on once you’ve actually done your work. Whatever work that you’ve chosen to do.

SEPTEMBER 4, 2020

What’s your agenda?
If you write something, speak up or otherwise interact with someone, you probably have a reason. There’s a point to your statement, a goal to your instruction.

The change you seek to make.

What actions are you hoping to cause?

If you don’t have an agenda, you’re probably sitting by quietly, or you’re frustrated at your lack of progress toward an unstated goal.

An agenda helps build resilience, because it’s a compass, a chance to reset when we’re thrown for a loop.

Being clear to ourselves about the change we seek to make makes it more likely we’ll make it.



Head’s up: We’re less than two weeks away from the launch of The Marketing Seminar. This is our tenth session. It’s the most popular workshop we run–there are more 10,000 graduates doing important work around the world. Check it out and sign up for more details today so you can join us at launch.

SEPTEMBER 3, 2020

Efficient or productive?
When time gets short (for new parents or startup founders, for example) we naturally focus on getting efficient. We can remove extraneous details and distractions and magically get much faster at getting tasks done.

But being efficient is not the same as being productive.

Productive is the skill of getting the right things done, so that we accomplish what we set out to do in the first place. The work that matters.

SEPTEMBER 2, 2020

A new normal
Time travelers should prepare for tough sledding. If you went back to 1820 or even 1920, all the sudden changes would discombobulate you. And the same is true for someone who came forward to today.

We’ve got a deep-seated desire for things to go back to normal, the way we were used to.

But this, this moment of ours is now normal.

For now.

And then, there will be another normal.

There is no “the new normal”. Because that’s definitive.

There’s simply the normal of now.

A new normal. This too shall pass.

SEPTEMBER 1, 2020

Famous colleges
Parents can do their children a favor if, from an early age, kids hear them say “famous college” instead of “good college.”

Because there’s very little data that shows that colleges with big football programs or lots of Nobel prize winners are actually good at doing what a college should do for an undergraduate.

If you want to spend the time and the money and the debt to go to a famous college, that’s your choice.

But don’t be confused into believing that a famous one is a good one.

And in this back-to-school moment, it’s smart to not only consider a gap year filled with intention as a way to engage with the world, but to think about what we’re actually buying when we buy a degree from a famous college.

Education and learning continue to diverge. In-person, real-time learning is too expensive, too scarce and rarely as effective as it could be, and we’re discovering that a commitment to life-long learning is more important than a four-year sabbatical that costs too much and delivers too little. And good colleges are in a position to do something about this, while the ones that are merely famous will fight hard to maintain their status quo.

Scarcity isn’t always needed to create value.

The pandemic has created a significant shift in perception, and the repercussions are going to be felt by colleges for years to come–many of them are going to be refactored, restructured or disappear.

AUGUST 31, 2020

Date certain
One of the most expensive things a service business or freelancer can do is promise that work will be done by a certain day. Which is something we need to do, of course, but we should charge appropriately. “It’ll be done soon,” should be way cheaper than, “It’ll be done at exactly 11 am on Tuesday.”

And one of the most important things we can do to focus our energy and commitment is be prepared to promise a date certain. It sharpens everything.

AUGUST 30, 2020

Systemic problems
… demand systemic solutions.

First, we have to pay attention.

Then we need to acknowledge that a solution is possible.

And then we need to commit. To the long, persistent road to altering the status quo.

The world is forcing us to pay attention to lingering problems more urgently than ever before. Real change on issues of dignity, justice and health are long overdue

Urgent problems are too important to earn only a moment of our attention. Important projects demand that we keep showing up to make the change we seek. Showing up and showing up, at the root and at every turn, consistently working toward systemic solutions.

When we think about the problems we’ve solved as a community, this is the way it always happens. Making things better, over time, with focus. Persistent commitment doesn’t lower the urgency of the moment, it acknowledges it.

AUGUST 29, 2020

Destinations, risks and journeys
Where are you headed? The choices you’re making, the effort, the sacrifices—where is the destination?

We make choices every day about our destination. And because of those choices, we go on a journey.

Along that journey, we take risks but we also experience an internal narrative about those risks.

And so, destinations, risks (perceived and actual) and journeys define our lives.

It’s possible you’ve come to the conclusion that the destination you’ve chosen isn’t for you. That being a pop star, a successful VP of accounting or a receptionist with a secure position isn’t a life you’d like to lead.

But don’t confuse that with the journey. Maybe you’d be happy with the pot of gold at the end of your rainbow, but it’s entirely possible you don’t want to suffer the discomfort and indignities and effort it will take to get to that destination, that you’d like an easier path. You’ll happily take the destination but the truth is, the journey is too arduous.

And don’t confuse that with your imagining of the risks along the way. It might be that you want the destination, that you are willing to put up with (or even delight in) the journey but your narrative of the risks and dangers are just too much to handle.

When we conflate the destination with the journey and with our narrative of the risks, we have no hope of improving any of the three. Instead, we often pushed to throw out all three at once or embrace them all. But it’s possible, with effort and planning, to make the journey more palatable or the risks feel more tolerable.

The destination isn’t the journey. And our narrative of the actual risks is up to us.

AUGUST 28, 2020

Small adjustments
Even better than buying a new bicycle is adjusting the seat on your existing bike properly.

That’s because the height of the seat changes your power. It’s the point of maximum leverage, responsible for aligning all of the forces you bring to bear on the process.

When we begin to think about our work, we tend to focus on the largest structures–what it looks like from the outside. But as we engage with the problem at hand, it turns out that our impact changes based on how we stand, what we believe and the ways we interact with the systems right in front of us.

Get the strategy right, then implement small changes, repeated with persistence and generosity.

AUGUST 27, 2020

Far away is difficult
Humans are bad at understanding things that are very far away in scale or time.

Atoms aren’t actually made up of tiny particles that are like rocks, but smaller. And planets aren’t simply very large billiard balls. We can only understand the behavior of things big and small by realizing that they’re not actually different versions of something of the size that we can easily see.

Things that happened a million years ago are hard to visualize, and we can’t reliably make many guesses about how the world is going to be a thousand years from now (and even fifty is difficult–lately, four weeks is a stretch).

Physics is straightforward–except when it comes to things that are very small and those that are very large, when it all gets weird. Different rules apply.

Extrapolation is far easier to claim than it is to do. That person across the counter or the web from you probably has very different experiences, beliefs and expectations than you do. Starting with your experience and assuming it matches their own is a trap.

Most everyone is very far away. And most feelings act like they are very small (or very large).

AUGUST 26, 2020

The relativity of time
Two things are true simultaneously:

We’re running out of time.

We have too much time on our hands.

How can we be at a deadline and bored at the same time?

We always are.

Our experience of time relates to engagement, fear, opportunity and the culture.

AUGUST 25, 2020

From education to learning
Education is the hustle for a credential. It exchanges compliance for certification. An institution can educate you.

Learning can’t be done to you. It is a choice and it requires active participation, not simple adherence to metrics.

Learning is the only place to find resilience, possibility and contribution, because learning is a lifelong skill that isn’t domain dependent.

Most of the learning moments in our lives are accidental or random. A situation presents itself and if we’re lucky, we learn something from it.

We built the altMBA to make learning intentional.

The last session of the year is in October, and applications are due tomorrow, August 25th.

You’ll be surrounded by a cohort of others, each on their way to leveling up and moving forward. We only do it four times a year, only with a few hundred people, always with our alumni coaches on board.

I hope you’ll check it out. Learning is our best way forward, because learning creates community.

AUGUST 24, 2020

Profit taking is lazy
Once an organization reaches scale, particularly if it feels like a monopoly, it’s tempting to “take profits.”

This means less investment, fewer staff and a lot less care. Those things are expensive. Easier to simply keep the money.

And those things involve emotional effort. Easier to simply point to the bottom line, as if that’s the point.

Lazy managers dump the emotional labor on overworked frontline staff instead of creating systems that create value for everyone.

And lazy shareholders reward quarterly earnings instead of understanding the long-term ramifications of failing to serve customers.

“We don’t care, we don’t have to,” is often the last slogan once-great institutions have emblazoned on their door.

AUGUST 23, 2020

Situational gravity
All of us are good at rationalizing. It helps us process the world, navigate our choices and live with ourselves.

But gravity doesn’t care if you got a lot of sleep last night or not. It’s still the same amount of force.

The pavement doesn’t care if you always wear a helmet on your bike, except just this one time when you didn’t, because you were having a video taken.

Melanoma doesn’t care that you always wear sun screen, except that one day when you were really busy and couldn’t go back to the house for it.

Outside forces don’t care about the situation, because they have no awareness or memory. They simply are.

Newton’s law doesn’t care that you were really distracted and that’s why you weren’t wearing a seatbelt, and the virus that infected your friend doesn’t care about why that person in the office decided not to wear a mask, either.

People are very good at stories. That’s our core technology. Everything else in the world, though, has no interest in them.

AUGUST 22, 2020

The opposite of confidence
It’s not anxiety.

And it’s not panic.

The opposite of confident is not confident. Unsure.

Being unsure can be healthy. It can help us focus on how we can make our work more likely to become the contribution we seek.

But anxiety and panic have nothing to do with an informed understanding of how the world is unfolding.


Toward a Zoom agreement
If you promise not to check your email while we’re talking, we promise to not waste your time.

If you agree to look me in the eye and try to absorb the gist of what I’m saying, I agree to be crisp, cogent and on point.

If you are clear about which meetings are a waste of time for you to attend, we can be sure to have them without you.

If you can egg me on and bring enthusiasm to the interaction, I can lean into the work and reflect back even more energy than you’re contributing.

The purpose of a meeting is not to fill the allocated slot on the Google calendar invite. The purpose is to communicate an idea and the emotions that go with it, and to find out what’s missing via engaged conversation.

If we can’t do that, let’s not meet.

Multi-tasking isn’t productive, respectful or healthy.

AUGUST 21, 2020

The best available option
That’s not the same as perfect.

The best available option is always available.

Perfect almost never is.

If you care enough to contribute, you can care enough to not wait for perfect.

AUGUST 20, 2020

Like a surgeon
Some jobs need you to show up in person (and for the time being, surgeons are in that category, but with robotically controlled waldo arms, who knows…).

But many jobs can be done more effectively with a combination of asynchronous work, video calls and emotional effort.

Don’t confuse a long or risky commute and co-work with showing up with your full self.

If they don’t need you in person, perhaps it’s better to show up with a great attitude instead of paying the high price it takes to be there on time, in real time.

And if they do need you in person, then be there. Truly there. 100% present.

It’s the slots in between, where attendance is taken, power is on display and the work is mediocre that cause us a lot of stress.

AUGUST 19, 2020

Cheating
There are really only two ways to approach this:

“We don’t cheat.”

“We cheat when we can get away with it.”

The posture of, “our side doesn’t cheat,” is the belief in the validity of the game itself. It’s a statement of moral authority, a promise of consistency and valor. It respects the process.

The posture of, “cheat if you can,” is the belief in the ends at any cost. It degrades the system, because if everyone cheats, then there is no system left.

Cheaters often brag about their exploits, because they want to normalize them.

Sophisticated competitors, the ones who really want to win, understand that cheating destroys the very thing they set out to do. Because once cheating is normalized, the winner is the person who had the guts to cheat the most and destroy the system, not the one who deserved to win. Being against cheating doesn’t mean you don’t want to compete, it means that you do.

In every community, on every team, there are people who believe that the only chance they’ve got is to cheat. Our systems persist only when peers in the community step up and insist that the cheater stop. Because being on a team that wins by cheating is ultimately self-defeating.

AUGUST 18, 2020

Spreading like wildflowers
Often, people encounter ideas that are spreading like wildfire.

The problem with a wildfire is that not only is it out of control, but it leaves nothing but destruction in its wake.

Build an idea that spreads like wildflowers instead.

AUGUST 17, 2020

Wants and needs
You’re unlikely to get everything you want. That’s a good thing, because wants are part of what define us.

It’s entirely possible that you’ll get most of what you need, though.

The trick is in being clear about what you put into each category.

AUGUST 16, 2020

Amplify your strengths
People don’t hire you, buy from you or recommend you because you’re indifferently average and well rounded.

They do it because you’re exceptional at something.

What if you invested the energy to be even more exceptional at it?

AUGUST 15, 2020

Noodling
If someone offers you “feedback,” your Spidey sense might start to tingle. Feedback isn’t often part of a warm and fuzzy feeling.

“Advice” is better. If you ask someone else for advice, you’re engaging them in your journey.

But, as Peter Shepherd points out, “noodling” is the best of all. When we start noodling over an idea, we can be sure that no one is going to get injured.

AUGUST 14, 2020

Rejected!
They didn’t reject you.

They rejected an application. They rejected a business plan. They rejected a piece of paper.

They don’t know you.

AUGUST 13, 2020

The Sunday circular
The “freestanding insert” was a multi-billion dollar business. Printed in bulk, then handed over to newspapers that would insert it into their Sunday paper, it was filled with coupons. In fact, the coupons were the entire point.

And the coupons worked.

They worked for two reasons:

It gave big companies a chance to treat different people differently. If a consumer cared about saving money more than time or hassle, they could clip the coupons, bring them to the store and pay a different price than people who couldn’t be bothered. In essence, there were two prices for these products, based on how much the consumer wanted to spend and how they chose to allocate their time.
Clipping the coupons, which began as an economic choice, became an identity and a hobby. The people who got really into it actually found happiness and esteem in the game. And it was a game.
As commerce moves online. the activities are changing, the middlemen are as well, but the two pillars remain. Priceline was a pioneer in this, giving travel shoppers a way to sign up for hassle, inconvenience and insecurity (you didn’t know which airline until after you bought your ticket) as a way to signal to airlines that they cared a great deal about price.

Mark Fraunfelder brings us this 200-year-old quote:

“Money is the best bait to fish for man with.” — Thomas Fuller, Gnomologia (1732)

I’m not sure that’s true. I think our story about money ends up being even more important.

[PS I just subscribed to Mark’s brand new newsletter. He’s been writing for and with the net forever, and I’m excited about Magnet. It’s not free, which is another story about money worth exploring.]

AUGUST 12, 2020

An extraordinary book
Great non-fiction helps us see the unseen, plants and nurtures ideas that matter, and, sometimes, can leave us better than we were.

Isabel Wilkerson’s new book Caste does all of those things. It uses language, analogy and history to pull together disparate threads into a coherent, devastating whole.

Highly recommended.

AUGUST 11, 2020

Selling your time
We don’t pay surgeons by the hour.

And if the person who cuts the lawn shows up with a very fast riding mower, we don’t insist on paying less because they didn’t have to work as hard.

Often, what we care about is the work done, not how long it took to do it.

And yet, some jobs, from law to programming, charge by the hour.

When you sell your time, you’re giving away your ability to be a thoughtful, productivity-improving professional.

Sell results.



[Today’s one of the last days of 2020 to enroll in The Creative’s Workshop. I hope you can check it out.]

AUGUST 10, 2020

Simple tips for security and serial numbers
[This probably impacts every person reading this, but few of us get to decide to fix it. I figured it was worth sharing so you can share it…]

Don’t require special characters (like ! or worse, ‘) in the passwords created in your app or on your site. You’re simply training people to either forget them or to write them down in an unsafe location. Instead, require long passwords.

When you set up a wifi password that others have to use, there’s really no reason to use capital letters, special characters or anything that’s a hassle to type on a phone. Try a phone number instead.

Don’t use ‘0’, ‘O’, ‘o’, ‘l’ or ‘1’ in any context where they have to be distinguished–like room numbers, serial numbers or the names of children. This is why zip codes are easier to use than postal codes, and why mixed letters and numbers are worth avoiding.

If you’re requiring 2FA (a good thing), don’t rely on email or texts, use an app instead. And don’t make the text code 7 digits (as my former bank did in an effort to pretend that they cared). 6 is more than enough.

Instead of serial numbers, companies should consider using three words mushed together, like hey-zebra-fun. This is way easier to read and communicate to others. Imagine how easy it would be to deal with your VIN or computer serial number if you could simply say three words. All the company will need is three lists of 300 common words, which, when juxtaposed, give us plenty of combinations.

And a password manager is a worthwhile program to install. If you haven’t, today’s a great day to start.

BONUS: It never hurts to say ‘please’ in your forms and other online communications. It’s free.

Thanks.

PS all of this advice is on the path to obsolete once computers can talk and think and interact just a little better than now. Which is happening. Here’s my recent podcast about it.

Marketing bonus: A fun summary of my work from Brendan.

AUGUST 9, 2020

Don’t waste the lesson
Things rarely turn out precisely the way we hoped.

Sometimes, if we’re lucky, we can figure out why.

If we find the lesson and learn from it, it might be even more valuable than if we’d simply gotten lucky.

AUGUST 8, 2020

Drop in
One of the most difficult things to do in skateboarding is to learn to ‘drop in’. This is the commitment at the top of the ramp. One moment, you’re standing still, at the abyss, and the next you’re committed, fully engaged with gravity.

The worse thing you can do is half.

When you sort of commit, you’re likely to fall.

The rule is pretty simple: If you’re going to bother going skateboarding, then you’ve already decided. In this moment, you’re not making a new decision. You’re simply acting on what you said you wanted to do in the first place.

Decide once. It’s fine to opt-out. But once you decide, there’s no upside in re-litigating your decision, particularly when it leads to needless risk and wasted effort.

And of course, you may have realized all the moments in our lives where our hesitation to drop in is precisely at the heart of the challenge.



[Skateboarding details here. Worth noting that “dropping in” while surfing is a very different thing, and the opposite rules apply.]

AUGUST 7, 2020

What do you own?
Your skills.

Your reputation.

The noise in your head, your attitude, your personal passions…

But after that, it starts to diverge.

Some own real estate. Some own machines. Some own trademarks, or the permission asset of being able to interact with people who want to be interacted with.

If you want to build a career as a freelancer, or a business as an entrepreneur, it helps to own something. Really valuable public companies are worth so much because of the assets they own and the market position they can defend as they grow. A hard-working but disrespected worker (whether an online freelancer or an actual factory worker) struggles because they’re not seen as owning enough. People have choices, and they often choose to hire and do business with entities that own something that they want to use or leverage.

As you seek to make a difference and to level up, it helps to come back to that key question: what do you own?

AUGUST 6, 2020

Posing for selfies
We act differently when we know we’re about to be on display.

Aim a camera at someone and they tense up. I guess we call it “taking” a picture for a reason. We feel defensive.

Social media multiplies this by counting “likes” (which doesn’t mean someone actually likes us) or “friends” (which doesn’t mean that someone is actually our friend.)

The irony is that the people we’re most likely to want to trust and engage with are the ones who don’t pose. They’re consistent, committed and clear, but they’re not faking it.

Figure out what you want to say, the change you seek to make, the story you want to tell–and then tell it. Wholeheartedly and with intent.

Posing is unnecessary.

AUGUST 5, 2020

Shipping creative work
If it doesn’t ship, it doesn’t count. If it’s not creatively productive, it’s not helpful. And if we’re lucky, this is the heart of our work. The work of creation in our chosen medium, putting ourselves on the hook, being asked to do something that’s never been done quite this way before.

Call this the work of a Creative, with a capital C. Someone who commits to making things better by leading through their work, and bringing insight and magic and utility to interesting problems.

It requires us to trust ourselves. To find a voice. To understand systems and genre and craft.

After a year of work, we launched the Creative’s Workshop last year. It quickly became the most engaging at-your-own-pace workshop at Akimbo. The people in the workshop gave and received more feedback each day than most people get in six months. And streaks of a hundred days of productive work in a row were the norm.

We only do this twice a year, and the new session is open for registration today. I hope you’ll take a few minutes to read the details and check out what previous participants have said about it. The last session was powerful enough that it became the basis for my new book, which comes out in November.

If you look for the purple circle on this page, you’ll find our secret discount, which is at maximum value today, but it eventually disappears.

Our future depends on the ability of each of us to find a way to make things better. To seek connection, to enable possibility and to open doors for others. I hope this workshop can help.

AUGUST 4, 2020

Two kinds of decisions worth focusing on
HARD ONES because you know that whatever you choose is possibly the wrong path. Hard decisions are hard because you have competing priorities. Hard decisions that happen often are probably a sign that the system you’re relying on isn’t stable, which means that the thing you did last time might not be the thing you want to do this time.

EASY ONES because it probably means that you’ve got a habit going. And an unexamined habit can easily become a rut, a trap that leads to digging yourself deeper over time.



PS The Early decision deadline for the October session of the altMBA is tomorrow, August 4th. If you apply by then, you’re still at the front of the line for admission… Apply here.

AUGUST 3, 2020

Steal the time from comfort
Everyone gets the same 24 hours. Reset every day, a fresh start.

Some of us are privileged enough to have the choice on how to spend some of that time. We can feel busy, but the busy-ness is largely a choice, a series of decisions we’ve made over the years about the things we choose to do, but have come to believe we have to do.

These habits are now comfortable. Walking away from spending that time will cost us comfort. In the short run. But if we don’t walk away from how we spent time yesterday, it’s hard to imagine that tomorrow will be much better than today.

HT: This riff from Derek Sivers is still resonating with me.

AUGUST 2, 2020

A too-simple answer to a complicated problem
The problem: how can we get people what they want and need?

It turns out that the simple short-term answer is the market.

The marketplace makes it possible to buy a nail clipper made of hardened steel for just four dollars, but only when you’re ready. The marketplace offers some people a solid brass set of the cups and balls magic trick and other people a hand-blown glass vase.

The marketplace is hyper-alert and never tires of finding overlooked corners of desire.

But the marketplace is not wise.

It’s blind, short-term and fairly stupid. Because it has no overarching goal. The market is nothing but billions of selfish people, trading this for that, without regard for what’s next.

Left alone, capitalism will devolve into corruption, bribery and predatory pricing leading to monopoly. Left alone, capitalism will pollute rivers, damage our health and create ever greater divides.

Capitalism gets us an opioid epidemic, the dark patterns of social media and doom scrolling.

Because the market isn’t wise. It has no sense of time or proportion.

The only way for the simple answer to solve our complicated problems is for it to have guardrails, boundaries that enable it to function for the long haul.

That’s something we need leadership to get done. And it’s more likely to get done if we acknowledge that we need to do it.

AUGUST 1, 2020

Weasel decisions
One way to make a decision with a team or a partner is to clearly make a decision. Have a budget, do the math, lay out the risks and the options and decide with intent.

The other method is to weasel your way forward.

Act as if.

Be presumptive.

Hide relevant facts or conceal your fears.

Avoid talking about the real issues, figuring that you’ll figure it all out as you go.

When you are uncomfortable with here, and it’s really tempting to want to be there, it’s easy to weasel your way forward. It feels urgent and appropriate. It rarely is.

JULY 31, 2020

What will you do with the time you save?
Ordering in instead of cooking.

Working from home instead of commuting.

Using a dishwasher instead of the sink…

All that time saved. Now that you’ve got the time back, you get to choose what’s truly important to you.

How will you spend it?

[Time spent on TV and social media has gone up every year of my lifetime].

JULY 30, 2020

The do-it-yourself at-home surgery kit
Here’s a rusty knife.

Here’s a video I saw on YouTube once.

Here are some instructions I read on Quora…

Okay, how hard can it be?

Actually, it might be very hard. Actually, expertise has value. Actually, just because someone said it on the internet doesn’t mean it’s true. Or useful.

Experts aren’t always right. But I’d rather live in a building built by an expert, fly in a plane designed by an expert and yes, have surgery done by an expert.

Even barbers get trained.

JULY 29, 2020

The non-urgent advance
Not a retreat, but a chance to advance.

Set up a zoom room. By yourself, perhaps. Weird but do-able. Or possibly, bring a coach or a colleague. But only one person.

No phones. No internet besides Zoom.

Spreadsheets.

Pads.

Spend four hours in isolation, with nothing to do but figuring out what’s scaring you and what you’ve been avoiding.

Spend half a day figuring out the difference between urgent and important.

If you’re too busy to do that, it’s probably because you are spending too much time on the urgent.

Forward!

JULY 28, 2020

Deliberately lo-fi
The resolution of communication has been on a downward slide for more than a decade.

Careful hand-tuned typography shifts to endless Helvetica, poorly kerned.

Face to face goes to landline phone call goes to cell phone call, goes to yelling into a speakerphone goes to lazy Zoom etiquette.

Music goes from live to vinyl to mp3.

Much of this is driven by the need to squeeze more and more stuff into a narrow pipe combined with a cultural desire for more instead of better.

But…

It will flip.

It always does.

Because better is better.

JULY 27, 2020

Esprit de l’escalier is overrated
The quick comeback. The clever repartee. The ability to, in the moment, say precisely what needs to be said.

As the world gets faster, more of us feel the regret of the staircase. The perfect remark, often cutting, comes to us just a little too late.

Don’t worry about it.

Because as the world keeps getting faster, there’s actually a shortage of thoughtful, timeless ideas that are worth sharing an hour or a week later.

JULY 26, 2020

Defending the status quo
Random House isn’t in the bookstore business, they’re in the business of publishing ideas that matter.

Audi isn’t in the gasoline business. They sell personal transportation.

You’re not in the business of having a job with an office. You are willing to trade time and effort in exchange for money and a chance to do work you’re proud of.

When the world changes, it’s tempting to fight hard to maintain the status quo that feels safe.

And so, utility companies lobby to ease emission standards, when they would be just fine if the standards were tightened. And so tech companies fight against new formats and new forms of exchange instead of leading with them. And of course, powerful cultural forces fight to preserve their hierarchies instead of figuring out how to thrive with new ones.

What we want and how we believe we get it are often two different things.

JULY 25, 2020

Money costs money
Because there’s a cost to using it on one thing instead of another.

And because the person who invests money has choices, and often chooses the choice that works best for them.

Most people would be happy with a hotel that generates a profit of a thousand dollars a day. But if the hotel cost $50,000,000 to build, you’re bust.

Time costs money too.

That’s not the same as saying “time is money,” which it isn’t. Time is magnificent, hard to stockpile and impossible to recover.

But it still costs. Which means that it’s worth considering whether something worthwhile comes back for your investment and your effort.

JULY 24, 2020

Keys on the ground
If you find a key and you don’t know what lock it will fit, you haven’t found much.

It’s easy to get excited about half the system, but real change and real benefit only happen when both pieces are working together.

JULY 23, 2020

Varieties of disbelief
Everyone, without exception, has found some things to not believe in. Things that are demonstrably true that we just don’t want to accept.

A bit like a fingerprint, each person’s pattern of disbelief is probably unique. You might believe that water is made of atoms, but that the moon is made of cheese. It’s hard to predict.

But the interesting question is: What has to happen for you to change your mind? What standard of proof, from what source, is sufficient for us to accept that something we’re sure wasn’t true, is true?

That’s a great place to begin.

JULY 22, 2020

Fake deadlines
Slack enables systems to function with more efficiency. That’s because unavoidable delays and errors compound in a system that doesn’t have enough buffer space.

But fake deadlines don’t solve this problem. Fake deadlines exist when we can’t trust others (or ourselves) to be clear about our progress or prioritize honestly. So we invent a date before we actually need something to arrive.

The challenge is that fake deadlines compound. Once someone on another project realizes that they’ve been outfoxed by a fake deadline, they’ll simply escalate their urgency as well. Or perhaps the provider realizes that we’ve been faking the deadlines, and so now there’s a whole new level of guessing about what the real deadline is.

Professionals don’t need fake deadlines and don’t respect them. Instead, we have the chance to build in appropriate slack, get our priorities straight and keep our promises.

JULY 21, 2020

Doom scrolling
Being informed is a virtue. It helps us make better decisions and encourages us to take action.

Getting hooked on an endless scroll of media inputs is not the same as being informed. There’s long been a business model of urgent news (“man bites dog!”), but now it’s been leveraged, amplified and optimized to suck people in for hours at a time. And division is much easier to sell than progress.

If it’s not helping you take action to make things better, what’s it for?

JULY 20, 2020

Commercial vulnerability
If you have a retail chain that offers:

A variety of products

at high margins

that are easy to ship

without being needed immediately

in expensive retail locations

where the in-person shopping experience isn’t particularly remarkable…

Then you’re in big trouble. Even before the pandemic. Because an online retailer is going to offer a better-priced, more convenient, higher-variety alternative and once your best customers try it, they won’t come back very often.

That seems pretty obvious, and we’re seeing the retail landscape littered with companies that should have seen this coming but didn’t do anything about it, because they were too busy protecting what they thought they were good at.

The question for most of us is: What if the work you do is:

compliance-based

standardized

repetitive

not based on innovative or flexible customer interaction…

If it is, it’s pretty likely that you’ll be replaced by a combination of robots, AI and outsourcing.

If they can find someone or something cheaper than you, they’re going to work overtime to do so.

The alternative is to be local, creative, energetic, optimistic, trusted, innovative and hard to replace.

JULY 19, 2020

Inventing narratives
That story in your head? It’s invented.

It has to be.

It might be based on some things that actually happened. The story we tell ourselves might be a useful predictor now and then. The story might even have been put there against our wishes, over time.

But it can’t possibly be a complete and detailed understanding of everything. That’s why it’s a narrative. It’s a shorthand, a map–not the territory. It’s filled with shortcuts and mindreading, a personal myth about you and your role in the world.

If we find our story isn’t helping us, if it’s inaccurate or distracting or enervating, we can work to change it.

JULY 18, 2020

The benefit of the doubt
Sometimes we earn it.

Sometimes, it’s handed to us even when we don’t deserve it.

And sometimes, we’re deprived of it, through no fault of our own.

Everything works better when we have the benefit of the doubt, and offering it doesn’t cost very much at all.

And it’s rare enough that we should work overtime not to waste it.

JULY 17, 2020

FOMO and KIMO
FOMO, of course, is the avoidable malady often known as ‘fear of missing out.’ It can completely undermine a life well lived, because it drives people to follow a crowd out of fear.

KIMO is in the past tense. “Knowing I missed out.” This is also avoidable, but in a different way. (I pronounce it K-eye-moh.)

I recently joined a club that sends out a liter of olive oil every now and then. And it comes with a newsletter. The newsletter reported that so many people are now members that they couldn’t send everyone the same type of oil, so they split the shipment in half. They then reported, in detail, everything about each of the two oils.

I can’t help it. I liked the reporting on the other one better.

While I’m confident that the one I ended up with will be delicious, my knowledge of what I missed, so beautifully described, is unavoidable.

It didn’t have to be. They could have also divided the newsletter in half. And more helpful, I could simply choose to not feel KIMO if it isn’t helpful.

Giving those you serve the satisfaction of knowing that they made a great choice is a fine service to offer. And we can find it for ourselves if we try.

JULY 16, 2020

Professionals, hacks and amateurs
The differences have little to do with skill, and a lot to do with resolve and intent.

The amateur contributes with unfiltered joy. There’s really no other upside–create your work because you can, because it helps someone else, because it makes you feel good.

The professional shows up even when she doesn’t feel like it. The professional understands the market, the customer and the price to be paid for work that’s worth paying for. But the professional isn’t a hack.

A hack is a professional who doesn’t care.

The hack has been beaten up enough times that he has emotionally disconnected. The hack has a short-term view, able to do what the client asks, without regard for how it will impact the culture or his long-term prospects.

Serviceable is for hacks. Memorable and remarkable belong to professionals and hard-working amateurs.

JULY 15, 2020

What’s your story?
If you care about it, it’s probably a story.

Whether you did well on the job interview. The results of your work to find resources to feed the hungry. Your efforts to engage with your teenagers…

We remember Bastille Day, not because we were there, but because the story resonates with us. We vote for candidates because of their stories, and shop at stores that have a story that resonates with us. And it’s a story that determines how people react to an emergency in their town.

The last time we took action on an idea, extended ourselves for a friend, and perhaps encouraged ourselves to launch a new project–these happened because the story worked.

And it’s possible to tell a better story.

It’s on us. We need to learn how to hear stories, figure out which ones are resonating, and do the difficult and urgent work to make our stories more effective.

Because if we care about it, it’s worth doing better.

There are techniques worth learning and doing the work with others on a similar journey is a powerful shortcut to doing it well. We’re relaunching the Story Skills Workshop with bestselling author Bernadette Jiwa today. It’s not only a place to share your story but it’s a place to learn how to do it better. It’s one of our most popular workshops because it’s proven and because it works. [Look for the purple circle on that page for a time-sensitive discount].

Your story matters.

JULY 14, 2020

Undoing the toxic myth of exclusion and scarcity
It’s easy to believe that excluding a group increases the benefits for those that are doing the excluding. That division and barriers somehow benefit the people who divide and hoard.

That’s true when we’re talking about allocating a truly scarce resource. If you’re on a spaceship that’s headed for Mars, the oxygen you’ve got is all you’ve got. (Unless you have a population with the innovation needed to make more).

But in our modern world, a world built on community, connection and the magic that comes from combining ideas, the opposite is true. When people deprive others of education and opportunity, they’re not helping themselves, they’re depriving themselves of the benefits that would come from what others would end up contributing. We don’t benefit from treating others poorly, we pay for it.

More programmers, more healthy parents, more scientists, more leaders, more passionate artists, more breakthrough designers, more caring health care providers–it doesn’t crowd out anything. It creates more opportunity for everyone.

This is one reason that the faux scarcity of famous colleges is so toxic. Because we don’t have to exclude and sort to help people move forward, yet we do.

If you’ve ever heard a clarinet orchestra perform, you can instantly see how this works. Of course, there are no all-clarinet orchestras, because they don’t sound very good.



PS The First Priority deadline for the October session of the altMBA is tomorrow, July 14th. Showing up early is rarely a bad idea. Apply here.

JULY 13, 2020

None of the above
That’s a comfortable thing to say for some. It lets you off the hook.

There are definitely people in every group who prefer “none of the above,” regardless of what’s on offer. Because none of the above is also a choice, something that’s offered without being offered.

Being against might feel easier than being for.

JULY 12, 2020

Systems design and the front line
If you experience lousy service or poor quality, it’s probably not solely the fault of the person who talked to you on the phone, dealt with you at the counter or assembled your product.

It’s the boss.

The boss didn’t design the system properly, didn’t align incentives, didn’t invest in training. The boss isn’t thinking hard about hiring the right people. And the boss isn’t listening.

As a result, the frontline workers are often undertrained, underresourced and overscheduled.

But, and it’s a huge but, those very same frontline workers don’t have to suffer in silence. They can provide a useful conduit of information and feedback. They can model how it could work better and establish a model for those around them. Not because it’s easy, but because it’s important.

The top-down nature of the industrial entity is rapidly being replaced by the power of peer-to-peer learning and leadership. There’s no top and no bottom. Simply the ranks of people who care enough to make things better.

JULY 11, 2020

Sixty orbits
Birthdays are contagious. No one actually remembers the day they were born, other people remember it for you. And the way we celebrate them is cultural, a shared process that keeps changing.

People keep track of birthdays, and today used to be mine.

Sixty of them.

It doesn’t feel like it’s been that many. Time flies when you’re busy. Lots and lots of projects. Countless friends made, lessons learned and ideas shared. Quite a journey, with lucky breaks and advantages again and again, beginning with my parents, the cultural identity, time and town where I was born… I wouldn’t have been able to go on this journey without you, thank you.

But today’s not my birthday (no need to send an email or a card). I’ve never really liked my birthday (it’s a long story involving a non-existent parrot), and the only reason for this post is to talk about who owns my birthday now.

What happens if we start celebrating our birthdays differently? Today belongs to the 20,000 + people who are on their way to a permanent supply of clean drinking water because readers like you brought their birthday (and mine) to charity:water. Thank you. Now, particularly now, when the world is in pain and when so many people are wrestling with health, the economy and justice, it’s more urgent than ever to think of someone you’ve never met living a life that’s hard to imagine.

And today, because it celebrates a round number, I’m hoping you will join in and help us break charity:water’s birthday record. And maybe donate your birthday too. Better still, if you subscribe as a monthly donor, you become a core supporter of a movement that changes lives with persistence and care.

How it works:

If you have the ability, I’m hoping you’ll click here and donate to charity:water to celebrate what used to be my birthday.

And either way, I’m hoping you’ll also donate your birthday to them. Because when it’s your turn to celebrate a missing parrot or a lost cake, you can ask your friends, and they can do what you just did.

It’s hard to visualize 21,000 people, mostly kids, fighting illness because the water in their village is undrinkable. That’s about three times the population of the town where I live. Thanks to all of you, my projects, including this blog, have already raised nearly a million dollars to build long-term solutions to this problem.

Will you help me double that?

Even one kid who lives the life he or she is capable of is worth this blog post and worth your support.

Thank you.

JULY 10, 2020

Take good notes
Everyone is entitled to their own experience.

In fact, that’s all we ever get. Our own take on the world around us, informed by where we’ve been and where we seek to go.

Sometimes, we get the chance to hear about someone else’s experience. In those moments, it’s tempting to use the opportunity to explain a situation, to excuse or even to persuade.

Perhaps it pays to simply take good notes.

Acknowledge what you’re hearing. Encourage and amplify and find empathy.

There are plenty of opportunities to expound on our version of the world. Every once in a while we have the rare chance to explore someone else’s.

JULY 9, 2020

The magic of the countdown
Thea von Harbou invented the countdown. 10, 9, 8…

It works.

It focuses the attention of everyone involved and ensures that we’re truly alert for what’s going to happen next.

It helps that the numbers go down, not up (because up might never end). And it helps that as we get closer to lift-off, tension goes up, not down.

But what really matters is this: There’s a commitment.

When we get to zero, we’re actually going to do this.

The commitment has to happen before the countdown can.

JULY 8, 2020

The 100 hour asset
We’re all so busy doing our work that sometimes we fail to build a skill worth owning.

If you invest 100 hours in a rare skill, you’re likely to acquire it. If you could learn to sharpen a tool better than your peers, organize a high-performance database, see the nuances in some sector of cryptography, know how to build a pretty-good WordPress site or really understand the arc of a particular writer’s career, you’d have something of value. Something that anyone who was focused enough to invest 100 hours could have, but few will choose to commit to.

String together a few of those, or dig deep and develop a 1,000 hour asset and now you truly have something.

There’s huge pressure to fit in, and plenty of benefits if you invest the time and stand out instead.

Twenty hours a week for a year and you can know something that puts you in a new category. Access to knowledge isn’t nearly as difficult as the desire to learn.

JULY 7, 2020

The difference between patina and cruft
Cruft is obsolete. Cruft is broken, discarded, non-functioning refuse that should be hauled away.

Patina is the wabi-sabi of positive use. A bookshelf of well-worn encyclopedias (now replaced by Wikipedia) has a patina to it. Simply seeing it reminds us of the possibility of discovery.

Patina makes it easier to go forward. Cruft gets in our way.

JULY 6, 2020

“It might not be for you”
If you walk into a noisy bar and ask why they don’t have Chopin on the jukebox, they’re unlikely to accommodate you.

The same is true if you go to a BBQ joint and insist on sushi.

Most of the brands we truly care about stand for something. And the thing they stand for is unlikely to be, “whatever you want, we have it.” It’s also unlikely to be, “you can choose anyone and we’re anyone.”

A meaningful specific can’t possibly please everyone. That’s the deal.

JULY 5, 2020

Are we part of us?
Liberty is a state of mind. It can be seen as a chance for freedom, or a promise made but not kept. We can choose to be part of something or choose to be apart.

Liberty is the offer and promise and requirement of responsibility. A willingness to connect and to offer dignity in response to those around us.

Independence is actually about cooperation and interconnectedness.

Yet we’ve set up systems that limit what we see, how we connect and insulate us from the hard work that’s right in front of us.

One of the most important words I know doesn’t have a simple English equivalent, which says a lot. Sawubona, a Zulu term, means, “I see you.” Not just your face, of course, but your hopes, your dreams, where you came from and where you’re going. It’s not something we’re good at, and I need to do it better.

Figuring out the best way to see and understand and care about the people we call ‘us’ can be difficult indeed. And essential.

JULY 4, 2020

Wasting second place
100 people apply for a job. 99 are sent home. What if the winner hadn’t applied? You might have been thrilled with the person who almost got the job.

17,000 people apply to a famous college. Only 10% get in. But at least a third were good enough to get in but didn’t get lucky. What happens to their narrative?

Selective organizations need to get better about communicating to the people who ‘almost’ make it. And it’s an incredible waste to discard all the knowledge that was gained in the sorting process… how to share it to help someone else?



PS coming soon: A new session of The Story Skills Workshop. You can join the list today to find out more and get updates.

JULY 3, 2020

Our top story
When you talk about your last job, your last vacation, the things that happened when you were 12…

What do you lead with?

Do you lead with, “I broke my ankle that summer and rarely got out” or is it, “I stuck with my reading regimen and read all of Shakespeare.”

Because both are true.

The top story is the one that informs our narrative, and our narrative changes our future.

JULY 2, 2020

Stolen ideas
Is there a difference between someone stealing a potato from your farm and someone stealing your idea?

Well, if everyone in town comes and takes a potato, your farm is bust.

But if everyone in town comes and takes your idea, you’re more known, trusted and effective than you used to be.

During Google’s beginnings, their business and tech plan was available to anyone who stopped by Stanford and bothered to read it. Every popular podcast based on an original idea gave away that original idea the moment the first episode of the podcast was available–long before the podcast itself became popular.

When I was a book packager, we ended up publishing about 120 books and pitching another 1,000 that were never published. In all of that time, I can only remember one of our ideas (it was a big one) being stolen from us and published without our participation. That code of ethics created a feeling of intellectual safety. But, at the same time, it was our successful books that were copied the most–and that copying was not just a symptom but often a cause of their success.

The internet is a copying machine. Ideas morph and change and spin as they move from one end to the other. Ripping ideas off wholesale and violating intellectual property rights is nothing to be proud of–each of us can do better than that. But holding ideas too tightly in fear of the ripples and echoes they’re going to cause is the real problem.

Being original is an opportunity to advance the conversation. Building something of utility with persistence and grace is truly generous, though, and it’s not related to whether or not anyone has ever heard your idea before.

JULY 1, 2020

The simple cure for writer’s block
Write.

People with writer’s block don’t have a problem typing. They have a problem living with bad writing, imperfect writing, writing that might expose something that they fear.

The best way to address this isn’t to wait to be perfect. Because if you wait, you’ll never get there.

The best way to deal with it is to write, and to realize that your bad writing isn’t fatal.

Like all skills, we improve with practice and with feedback.



[Mark your calendars: The Creative’s Workshop is coming back in August. Check out this page for details and to get updates.]

JUNE 30, 2020

Choices
How will we use our gifts? What difficult choices will we make–when it might be easier to hide?

Will we waste our advantages and insulation?

Will inertia be our guide, or will we follow our passions?

Will we follow dogma, or will we leap forward and be original, generous and helpful?

Will we choose a life of ease, or a life of service and adventure?

Will we wilt under criticism, or will we follow our convictions?

Will we bluff it out when we’re wrong, or will we apologize?

Will we be clever at the expense of others, or will we choose to be kind?

A cynic, or a builder?

And we get to decide again every single day.



[PS please consider this session of The Podcasting Workshop. It’s open now for registration.]

JUNE 29, 2020

How many moons?
How many moons in our solar system? With 8 or so planets, how many moons in total?

My guess, when challenged, was 22. I figured Earth had one, rounded up, etc.

It turns out that it’s more than 200. Saturn alone has more than 80 moons.

That’s a common mistake. We make it all the time. We assume that our neighborhood is like every neighborhood, that our situation and experience is universal.

That’s rarely true.

Embracing that on the path to empathy is a powerful step forward.

JUNE 28, 2020

The stolen address book
I used to ask, “If you stole Steven Spielberg’s address book, would it help you get a movie made?”

The point was that even if you had the phone numbers and names, calling them up and saying you’d stolen them wasn’t worth very much. The data has no value without trust and connection.

Now, twenty years later, all the address books have been stolen. Everyone has all the data. Identifying the right people (or spamming everyone) is easy and cheap.

Which makes the point even more urgent than ever: Without trust and connection, access to data is worthless.

JUNE 27, 2020

Useful explanations of reality
If we want to understand what’s going on around us, it’s helpful to be able to formulate a resilient story, one that holds up to scrutiny and allows us to make an impact.

That story shouldn’t change based on who’s in charge.

Which means that we don’t have to ask the head of the chemistry department why a reaction occurred. The theory works fine even if they’re not around.

JUNE 26, 2020

Everybody else
It’s natural to believe that everyone else is as confident, assured, long-term thinking and generous as you are on your very best day.

But that’s unlikely. Because everyone else is probably not having their best day at the same time.

Once we realize that the world around us is filled with people who are each wrestling with what we’re wrestling with (and more), compassion is a lot easier to find.

JUNE 25, 2020

Should schools reward skills or talent?
Talent is something you’re born with.

Skill is something you earn.

Skill comes from commitment and practice and self-discipline. The skill of earning skills is a lifelong advantage.

Without a doubt, encouraging kids to leverage their talents is a skill. And yet…

Who gets to be the center of the kids’ volleyball team–the tall kid or the one who practices the most diligently and brings the most teamwork to the game?

Who gets an ‘A’ in math–the one who can breeze through the tests or the student who asks intelligent questions and challenges the assumptions?

Who gets into a fancy college…

You get the idea.

Leaders talk about developing real skills and encouraging people to develop into their full potential, but too often, we take the short-term path of betting on raw talent instead. And of course, what looks like raw talent might not be. It could simply be our confusion about first impressions compared to the power of commitment, enrollment and persistence.

JUNE 24, 2020

Voices vs. noise
If it’s not relevant, it’s noise. If it’s untrusted, unwelcome or selfish, it’s noise.

But your contribution isn’t noise. Not for the right people, at the right time.

The internet isn’t a mass medium. The voices online are not for everyone, it’s not the Super Bowl or M*A*S*H or even the nightly news. Nobody reaches much more than 1% of the audience on any given day.

But…

That tiny slice that does want to hear from you, that needs to hear from you, that would miss you if you don’t speak up–for that audience, you’re not noise. You’re essential.

That’s why we built the Podcasting Workshop with Alex DiPalma. Enrollment launches today.

Not because we need more podcasts. We don’t.

Because we need your podcast.

JUNE 23, 2020

What’s at the front of the line?
A study of behavior at breakfast buffets showed that the first item in the buffet was taken by 75% of the diners (even when the order of the items was reversed) and that two-thirds of all the food taken came from the first three items, regardless of how long the buffet is.

This means that optimizing marketers usually put the things they most want to sell first.

And that smart consumers benefit from adopting patience as they consider what’s on offer.

Of course, this game theory applies to a lot more than food.

JUNE 22, 2020

Picky vs difficult
Picky people have consistent preferences and standards.

Difficult people change their preferences frequently, and often in response to who is presenting to them or the mood they’re in.

It’s pretty easy to figure out which makes for a better client or colleague.

JUNE 21, 2020

“That’s a good idea”
“And then what happens?”

Repeat the second question 100 times. Because after every good idea, there are at least 100 steps of iteration, learning, adjustment, innovation and effort.

Starting with the wrong idea is a waste of energy and time.

But not committing to the 100 steps is a waste of a good idea.

We put a lot of pressure on the idea to be perfect because it distracts us from the reality that the hundred steps after the idea are going to make all the difference. Nearly every organization you can point to is built around an idea that wasn’t original or perfect.

The effort and investment and evolution made the difference.

JUNE 20, 2020

Too long delayed
Today is Juneteenth, a holiday that should be more widely observed.

It doesn’t mark the date of Lincoln’s proclamation that freed enslaved people, nor does it occur on the day that the 13th amendment was passed. Both were overdue and urgent and important steps forward. Instead, it commemorates the day that a last group of enslaved people (outside of Galveston, TX) heard that they had been freed years earlier.

Holidays are symbols. They can cause us to pause for celebration or grief, for togetherness or simply to smile. Holidays are worth recalling because they give us a chance to connect and recommit to an idea that matters to us. This is a holiday about freedom delayed.

Change is hard, but delaying what’s right is toxic. Today we can remember just how much we have to do and realize the ability each of us has to see and alter the systems around us.

Not simply today, but every single day. A chance to make things better.

JUNE 19, 2020

A simple fork in the road
Some marketers want you to solve their problem.

And some marketers want to solve your problem.

Eagerly sending prospects to competitors who can help them better than you can is a fine symptom of where you stand on this choice.

JUNE 18, 2020

The dominant culture
One of the great cartoons involves two goldfish in a tank talking to one another. One responds in surprise, “wait, there’s water?”

When we don’t see the water, it’s a sign we’re benefitting from being part of the dominant culture.

And since we’re not fish, we can learn to see the water and figure out how it is affecting us and the people around us.

Visit a country where they don’t speak English and you’ll probably remind yourself all day that you speak English, something you didn’t have to think about last week. You’ll have to work overtime to understand and communicate. Back home, that stress disappears.

Living within a dominant culture means being reminded of this all day, every day.

When media images, policies and corporate standards tell someone that they are an outsider who needs to fit in in non-relevant ways, we’re establishing patterns of inequity and stress. We need to be clear about the job that needs to be done, the utility we’re seeking to create, but not erect irrelevant barriers, especially ones we can’t see without effort.

Good systems are resilient and designed to benefit the people who use them.

If the dominant culture makes it harder for people who don’t match the prevailing irrelevant metrics to contribute and thrive, it’s painful and wasteful and wrong.

It’s becoming more and more clear to me how much ‘water’ there is in the world I live in. Much of it is needless and counterproductive. Unfair, too. It will take an enormous amount of effort and persistence to reduce it. I’m working hard to see it. Because it’s everywhere.

JUNE 17, 2020

Creation/recognition
If you buy an old painting at a garage sale for $1,000 and then sell it for $25,000, was the change in value due to a change in the magic involved in the creation of the painting, or is it because the market now recognizes the painting for what it is (and was all along)?

When Alta Vista refused to pay a million dollars to buy Google, was the problem in the value of what Google had, or in Alta Vista’s recognition of that value?

There’s often a significant lag between the creation of something useful and when the market recognizes it.

That’s an opportunity for speculators and investors, who can buy before the recognition happens.

And it’s an opportunity or a trap for creators, who might get disheartened about the lack of applause and upside immediately after they’ve created something.

When we look to the outside world for valuation and recognition, we might be confused about the intrinsic value of what we just created. Over time, those things may come into alignment, but that’s rare indeed.

Creation plus persistence can lead to recognition. But creation without recognition is still a worthwhile endeavor.

[Two new chances to level up, coming soon, by request:

If you’re a graduating college senior or junior who has had plans disrupted by the worldwide pandemic, some good news. We’re going to offer our full-scholarship Emerging Leaders program again in August. The last session was extraordinary. 100 exceptional people came together, learned a lot and explored a new way forward. If you know someone who might benefit, please let them know. It’s free but space is really limited.

AND! The Podcasting Workshop returns. Click here for more details and to sign up for info.]

JUNE 16, 2020

Worthy adversaries and useful allies
Change happens more efficiently when we have both.

Often, they’re not individuals. It could be a status quo or a system.

In the early days of the Mac, Jobs chose Microsoft to be Apple’s adversary. But keeping the focus on them too long was an expensive and distracting mistake.

An adversary focuses the mission, but it also gives agency and leverage to the opponent.

It helps to have accomplices, leverage and a focus for the long haul as well.

JUNE 15, 2020

Measuring systems
I tried to recharge the lithium battery that works with my drill. After twenty minutes, the charger said the battery had failed.

Fortunately, I have a second battery. I put that into the charger and it also showed a failure.

Neither battery had failed. The charger had.

JUNE 14, 2020

Krulak’s law
The experience people have with your brand is in the hands of the person you pay the least.

Act accordingly.

(This involves training, trust, responsibility, leadership, dignity, authority, management and investment. It mostly means seeing the front-line people in your organization as priceless assets, not cheap cogs.)

JUNE 13, 2020

Invisible insulation
I didn’t spend any time yesterday worrying about being eaten by a grizzly bear. Or that I would get cholera from the water in my house.

Over time, we’ve built layers of insulation between ourselves and the world.

Shoes make it easier to walk around. We can put one foot in front of the other without constantly scanning for rocks or rusty nails.

This invisible insulation is a form of civilization.

And when it’s unevenly available, it becomes privilege. Just as invisible sometimes, but to make things better, we need to look at it and realize that it’s there and do something.

If other people have shoes, it doesn’t make your shoes less functional. But if they don’t have shoes, then everything else they contribute (to you, to me, to everyone) is going to be different.

We’ve done a shameful job in failing to offer insulation widely. Access to health care. Clean water. Good schools. Freedom of fear from state violence. And the benefit of the doubt, which is easy to overlook. Because it all adds up, every day, for generations.

It’s almost impossible to make a list of all the things I didn’t have to worry about yesterday. We need to work overtime to make that true for more people.

JUNE 12, 2020

Fill in the blanks
150 years ago, the periodic table of the elements was published.

It’s a truly stunning achievement because it predates the electron microscope. It’s a bit like labeling all the colors in a box of crayons in a world with nothing but very dim light.

Once the structure of the table was understood, its creator Dmitri Mendeleyev had a problem. Some of the elements that needed to be on it hadn’t been discovered yet. He knew that something needed to fill a slot, but he wasn’t exactly sure what.

And so he left the square blank.

Which inspired other scientists to go looking for what was needed to fill in that empty slot.

Much of the innovation of the internet has worked this way. As well as developments in urban planning, civil society and small business as well.

Once you see the grid, you can see the empty boxes. And then go fill them.

HT Paul.

JUNE 11, 2020

Which bridges?
The head of the Long Island Parkway told Robert Moses, “Legislation can change, but it’s very hard to tear down a bridge once it’s up.”

What he meant, what the notoriously racist Moses understood, was that once the systems are in place, they defend themselves. The roads of Boston have all outlasted the buildings. The buildings get razed and rebuilt, but the byways and thoroughfares remain, because the system demands far more effort to change than the road ever did to get built in the first place.

The irony of the word ‘bridge’ in this sentence is profound. Because when we say bridge, we usually mean a connection, or a way to move forward. And while these metaphorical bridges are far more fragile than the stuff Moses built, they’re worth building too.

Because one way to change systems is to start building connections and tunnels and yes, bridges, that make the old ones shift.



JUNE 10, 2020
